# Chapter 5

<!-- page-1 (book p.99) -->

*
1. A ZOMBIE WORLDVIEW BACK FROM THE DEAD
It's not a movie wed recommend, but the opening sequence
of Shaun of the Dead, a cult-classic zombie flick, is pretty re-
vealing. Set to an upbeat carnival tune, each brief scene teatures
people shuffling along, blankly staring ahead, checking their
cell phones—just going through the motions. The filmmaker's
argument is whimsically clear: If zombies invaded today, wed
have a hard time picking them out. Just about everyone seems
disconnected, unthinking, and apathetic.
In human history, ideas can be like zombies; when you
think they're dead, they are revived, now more dangerous
than before. Such is the case with Marxism and its political
offshoot, communism: they're back from the dead and once
again among us.


<!-- page-2 (book p.101) -->

Most people have a vague sense of Marxism's destructive nature. "Its a good idea on paper,
but it never worked in reality" they say. Very few take Marxism seriously as a worldview;
the words Marxism or communism conjure images not
of fearsome military power or a hundred million dead
Marxism: an atheistic and
materialistic worldview
based on the ideas of
Karl Marx that promotes
the abolition of private
property, public ownership
of the means of production
(i.e., socialism), and the
utopian dream of a future
communistic state.
bodies but of silly propaganda posters, ridiculous dic-
tators who have no clue how out of step they are with
the rest of the world, and clueless hippies wearing Che
Guevara T-shirts. Many believe that if you can laugh
at it, you don't have to think about it. That's a mistake.
So what are these ideas, Marxism and communism?
Very simply, Marxism is the philosophy of Karl Marx.
A Marxist is someone who embraces this philosophy.
Communism is the word Marx used to describe the ideal
state achieved when his views are put into practice, so a
communist is a person who applies Marx's ideas to the
government and the economy. Communism stands in
Communism: the Marxist
ideal of a classless and
stateless utopian society
in which all property is
commonly owned and
each person is paid
according to his or her
abilities and needs.
contrast to capitalism, an economic system in which
private citizens own the means of production rather
than the government, and in which competition and
the market forces of supply and demand determine prices
rather than government decree. Socialism is another key
term you'll see a lot in Marxist writings and just about
everywhere in society today. Marx defined socialism as
"the abolition of private property"
Karl Marx did most of his work in the British Mu-
Capitalism: an economic
system in which capital
assets are privately owned,
and the prices, production,
and distribution of
goods and services are
determined by competition
within a free market.
seum in London, where he fled when his revolutionary
activities elsewhere caused whole nations to dislike him.
There was a lot to dislike. Marx was a famously rude
person whose unwillingness to bathe or get a haircut
was legendary, as was his inattentiveness as a husband
and father.! And though he claimed to understand the
working man, Marx never set foot in an actual factory
that we know of or made a living by physical labor.?
On February 21, 1848, Marx published The Commu-
nist Manifesto with the assistance of Friedrich Engels, a
Socialism: an economic
system based upon
governmental or
communal ownership of
the means of production
and distribution of goods
and services.
young revolutionary who subsidized Marx's prodigious
financial appetite with money earned, ironically, from
his father's factory. After reciting the evils of factory
owners, the manifesto states,
The Communists disdain to conceal their views and
aims. They openly declare that their ends can be at-
tained only by the forcible overthrow of all existing
social conditions. Let the ruling classes tremble at a
Communistic revolution. The proletarians [working class] have nothing to lose but
their chains. They have a world to win. [Proletarians] of all countries, unitel
The manifesto is vivid, even prosaic. Its call to violent force is chilling, especially since
its fans have taken its admonitions literally for more than 150 years now, marching Marx's
bloodthirsty ideas across the pages of history as surely as Alexander the Great's armies marched
across Asia.
When the Berlin Wall finally fell in 1989, many thought communism itself would crumble
too. In quick succession, the Soviet Union and its satellite states bit the Marxist hand that
promised (and claimed) to feed them. Yet many nations today still put their faith in commu-
nism, among them China, Cuba, and North Korea.
And yet, very few in the West have truly come to grips with what has happened in his-
tory when Marxists get their way. We all know about the horrors of Nazi Germany, but the
slaughter of well over one hundred million people by communist regimes in the twentieth
century seems not to have registered. Specifically, historians now estimate, only as a starting
point, anywhere from 20 to 60 million deaths in the Soviet Union,* 40 to 70 million in China, 5
2 million in Cambodia (by the Khmer Rouge), 1.6 million in North Korea, and 1.2 million
in Yugoslavia.° And the slaughter continues to this day. Chinas one-child policy, instituted
in 1971, led to 336 million abortions, many performed against the will of the parents? We
know a lot about Hitler-who his girlfriend was, what kind of music he listened to-but
virtually nothing about Lenin, Stalin, Mao Tse-tung, Pol Pot, or the others in communism's
panoply. Remarkably, communism in the twentieth century killed twice the combined dead
from World Wars I and II.
Why the indifference? Maybe it's because, as Joseph Stalin is reported to have said,
"One death is a tragedy; a million is just a statistic? But these were people like you and me,
with hopes and dreams and memories and families who loved them. It is too late to stand
up for them, but we can and must honor their memory by proclaiming, "Never again." Up
against the silence surrounding communism's atrocities, the first act of healing is to speak.
Qui tacet consentit-"silence equals consent." There are many reasons we should care, not
the least of which is George Santayana's admonition: "Those who cannot remember the
past are condemned to repeat it." We should also care because Marxism's evil was one of
supposed virtue: Marxists reconciled themselves with evil because they believed it served
an ultimate good. In history when leaders are willing to use any means to achieve what
they consider to be the ultimate good, it invariably leads to atrocity. Such is the case with
Marxism. It's up to us today to see that it never happens again. As the British statesman
Edmund Burke said, "When bad men combine, the good must associate; else they will fall,
one by one, an unpitied sacrifice in a contemptible struggle."
Marxists doubtless will see our analysis as unfair and will reel off a laundry list of uncon-
trollable historical circumstances and the unfortunate rise of a few bad actors who they claim
are truly to blame. To find out if they're right, we'll dig into the influence of Marxism today,
examine its basic principles, discern what kind of worldview it is, and explore its answers to
life's ultimate questions. For the most part, we'll use the words of the Marxists themselves,
not their critics, to move the discussion along. First, we'll answer the question "Is this even
something we should still care about?"


<!-- page-3 (book p.103) -->

2. Is MARXISM STILL INFLUENTIAL TODAY?
Remarkably, communism
in the twentieth century
killed twice the combined
dead from World Wars I
and Il.
Nazism is a relic of the past. Sure, there are self-
proclaimed Nazis out there, a handful of social misfits
who favor swastikas as an angry fashion accessory. But
their line of actual influence is thin, and being "anti-
them" has in general become a rather weak cause. While
we want to be alert to the rise of fascism, we need not
Waste time scouring the Internet to see if Hitler moustaches are a growing fashion trend.
Maybe Marxism and communism are like that: unpleasant but not a threat. If so, being anti-
communist is a cause for embarrassment, like having a crazy uncle who sits on the front
porch and hurls insults at passersby.
Many see Marxism and communism as nonthreatening. Some even think it's a little cool.
The image of Marxist revolutionary Che Guevara, Fidel Castro's most ruthless lieutenant
and overseer of Cuba's first prison camp, La Cabaña, is one of the most famous icons in the
world. Hollywood has even made a movie about his private journals, The Motorcycle Diaries,
to romanticize Guevara's lust for violent overthrow.°
But Marxism and oppression go together like peanut and butter. By its very nature,
Marxism requires a radical remaking of society—wresting capital out of the hands of citizens
and dismantling laws protecting private property. In far too many cases, Marxists came in as
liberators, ruled as tyrants, and are remembered as criminals. Stalin's gulags, Pol Pot's killing
fields, North Korea's famines, East Berlin's wall, and China's one-child policy and its millions
of missing girls are only exhibits 1 through 5. Sometimes atrocities like these take decades to
unfold, but the line of cause and effect eventually becomes apparent to those with eyes to see.
But this still does not answer the question, Are Marxism and communism relics of the
past, or should we still be concerned?
Let's Look at two aspects of Marxism's influence: Marxism around the world and Marxism
in the university.
Marxism around the world. The world's five communist countries (China, Vietnam,
Laos, North Korea, and Cuba) account for approximately one of every five people on the
planet. They are not, however, the only ones dealing with Marxism's implications. Socialism
is the official policy of many other nations (Bangladesh, India, Sri Lanka, Portugal, Tanza-
nia, Guyana)." If we add to that list the countries with powerful socialist parties (France,
Greece, Venezuela, Sweden, Zambia, Syria, Norway, Libya, Algeria, among others), those that
pursue socialist policies as a matter of practice, such as Zimbabwe, or those that are bent on
destroying private property, i's easy to see that Karl Marx still wields power from the grave.
The Communist Manifesto outlined ten ideas, a sort of "Ten Commandments", that serve
in some ways as a series of steps by which a society can be transitioned to communism.
Read the list carefully; one or more of these ten items makes the news just about every day,
and some of them have been accepted in America and the West:
1. Abolition of property in land and application of all rents of land to public purposes
2. A heavy progressive or graduated income tax
3. Abolition of all rights of inheritance
4. Confiscation of the property of all immigrants and rebels
5. Centralization of credit in the banks of the state, by means of a national bank with
state capital and an exclusive monopoly
6. Centralization of the means of communication and transport in the hands of the
state
7. Extension of factories and instruments of production owned by the state; bringing
waste lands into cultivation and improving the soil generally in accordance with a
common plan
8. Equal obligation of all to work. Establishment of industrial armies, especially for
agriculture
9. Combination of agriculture with manufacturing industries; gradual abolition of all
distinctions between town and country through a more equable distribution of the
populace over the country
10. Free education for all children in public schools; abolition of children's factory
labor in its present form; combination of education with industrial production,
and so on.
Marxists are convinced these steps are not only best but will inevitably occur as more
and more nations evolve to a higher state of centralized planning. The reality, of course, is
much more complex. Historian Bill Federer reviewed the historical records and found that
state control of the economy goes back more than two thousand years." As Federer sees it,
the development of the United States of America was an enlightened move away from the
principles of protocommunism and toward greater justice and equality of opportunity.
Today, since communism is still a bad word, those who want to achieve its goals but not
claim its name have developed a new approach, which was identified as "state capitalism" in
a special report by the Economist in 2012.13 In a nutshell, state capitalism is the practice of
federal governments taking ownership and management control of otherwise private busi-
nesses. Though the companies still operate in the private marketplace, they do so with the
inequitable backing of state capital and power.4
The idea behind state capitalism is inherently socialistic, in spite of the use of the word
capitalism. The state rules by force. Tax revenues are given under compulsion, foreclosing
all other possible economic choices. At present, Russia,
China, and other nations are committed to state capi-
talism, but so are many American leaders. Recently, for
example, the US federal government has made aggressive
moves in the health-care, energy, and banking sectors
of the economy.
Government control of the economy creates a sig-
State Capitalism:
the practice of federal
governments taking
ownership and
management control of
private businesses.
nificant justice issue because the government is so vul-
nerable to corruption. History professor Burton Folsom
says the greatest corruption in American history came from government intervention in the
economy, not from the free market. 15 The Hoover Institution's Arnold Beichman pointed out
that socialism in the former Soviet Union, rather than distributing goods equally, actually


<!-- page-4 -->

created a class known as the nomenklatura, whose members "own everything, the auto fac-
tories, the dachas, the food markets, the pharmacies, the transport system, the department
stores. Everything? In practice, Soviet-created communism used government force to take
from the powerless to give to the powerful.
Instead of achieving its stated goal of destroying class distinctions, socialism tends to
remove competition and deposit cronyism in its place. Milovan Djilas said, "The Commu-
nist revolution, conducted in the name of doing away with classes, has resulted in the most
complete authority of any single new class"" In Soviet times this elite class ran the economy
into the ground. Will it do the same in our country?
Marxism in the university. Several decades ago, U.S. News and World Report revealed an
alarming increase in the number of Marxist professors on university campuses. ' In affirmation
of the claim that ten thousand Marxist professors roam America's college campuses, Herbert
London said, "Every discipline has been affected by its preachment, and almost every faculty
now counts among its members a resident Marxist scholar."19
Interest in Marxism waned in the late 1980s as the
world grappled with the fallout from Europe's and Asia's
Instead of achieving its
stated goal of destroying
class distinctions,
socialism tends to remove
competition and deposit
cronyism in its place.
disastrous applications of the Marxist worldview. But
a few stubborn Marxists hung on, among them Duke
University's Fredric Jameson and Lancaster Universi-
ty's Terry Eagleton. Eagleton, whose books reviewers
invariably see as "witty, recently published Why Marx
Was Right. Frank Barry, a reviewer for the Irish Times,
called the book a "short, witty, and highly accessible jaunt
through Marx's thought in preparation for the second coming In 2012, the Guardian, a
British newspaper, chronicled the return of Marxism noting the rise in interest in Marxism
as the economy falters and people cast about for explanations.?!
Martha Gimenez, a sociology professor at the University of Colorado and an influential
academic, argues that Marxism is the proper framework through which to understand
everything that happens in society today:
We are, in Marx's terms, "an ensemble of social relations" ... and we live our lives at the
core of the intersection of a number of unequal social relations based on hierarchically
interrelated structures which, together, define the historical specificity of the capitalist
modes of production and reproduction and underlay their observable manifestations."
Author bell hooks (intentionally uncapitalized), whom Essence magazine called a "vi-
sionary feminist, 23 weaves Marxist angst into virtually every line of her jarring prose. In a
college commencement speech, hooks blamed the Wests focus on future planning for violence
and pain in the world: "Every imperialist, white supremacist, capitalist, patriarchal nation
on the planet teaches its citizens to care more for tomorrow than today... And the moment
we do this, we are seduced by the lure of death... To live fixated on the future is to engage in
psychological denial. It is a form of psychic violence that prepares us to accept the violence
needed to ensure the maintenance of imperialist, future-oriented society??*
What kind of person thinks it is evil to defer gratification and plan for the future? Perhaps
a person who suspects that her well-assembled dish of ideas for this evening's party will be
rancid by morning.
At any major university you'll find some professors overtly evangelistic about Marxism
and many others sympathetic to Marx's aims. The Socialist Worker newspaper will probably
be distributed on campus, and various leftist groups will compete for attention and funding.
The same is likely true in your state capital and in Washington, DC.
How is it possible for Marxist ideas to still be attractive to so many for so many years
after they presumably lost public favor? It only makes sense when one considers the two
central doctrines Marxists use to make sense of everything else: dialectical materialism and
economic determinism.
3. WHAT MARXISM TEACHES
The overarching Marxist narrative culminates in class equality through economic rev-
olution. The exploiters—those who control the means of production (i.e., those who own
businesses and employ people lord it over the exploited (i.e., those who do manual labor, who
do not have an ownership stake in their workplaces, or who do work but do not own their
workplaces). Overthrowing the exploiters will free the exploited; we'll all be happier if we are
all the same. Every so often there are protests clamoring for "people before profits, demanding
a leveling of the economic playing field. While Wall Street corruption is well documented,
protesters demanding the dismantling of the capitalistic system are merely repeating talking
points, even if unwittingly, of Marxist agitators from a century ago.?5
Those talking points consist of more than the seizure of private property. To understand
Marxism, you need to grasp two ideas: (1) Everything is about economics, and (2) history
is a struggle in which the move toward a state of communism is inevitable. The first idea is
called dialectical materialism. The second is economic determinism. Let's look at each.
Dialectical materialism. The Hegelian dialectic was a view of history conceived by the
German philosopher Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel. " In his view, the way people see the
world and act on it at any given time in history (the thesis) spawns a reaction, whose goal is
the negation of the way things are done (the antithesis).
The antithesis then becomes the norm and in turn is
opposed in what is called the "negation of the negation."
When the smoke clears from the conflict of the thesis and
antithesis, a synthesis of the two ideas forms from a merg-
ing of the thesis and antithesis. The synthesis becomes,
in turn, a new, more advanced thesis. For example, the
differences between Greco-Roman democracy's democrat
(thesis) and slave (antithesis) were lessened somewhat in
the difference between feudalism's (synthesis) aristocrat
and serf. Inevitably, though, the conflict process begins
again, leading to yet another synthesis-now making a
thesis of the feudalistic aristocrat and an antithesis of the
Dialectical materialism:
the belief that only the
material world exists and
that class struggles are
the mechanism behind
social and economic
progress (e.g., the current
economic clash between
the proletariat and
bourgeoisie will eventually
give way to socialism and
the end of capitalism.
serf— at an even more advanced level. For Marxists, the


<!-- page-5 (book p.107) -->

dialectical process is the means of progress. The conflict is always a spiral upward toward a
better way of thinking.
Materialism in philosophy does not mean coveting luxury goods. Materialism says that
only the world of matter exists. There is nothing outside of nature. No God or gods exist.
To Marxists, materialism and atheism are nonnegotiable. "In our evolutionary con-
ception of the universe, Engels said, "there is absolutely no room for either a creator or
a ruler. As Fyodor Dostoyevsky said, the "problem of Communism is not an economic
problem. The problem of Communism is the problem of atheism. Even though evidence
for materialism has not yet materialized, Marxists are confident it will. The Marxist scientist
A. I. Oparin stated, "We have every reason to believe that sooner or later, we shall be able
practically to demonstrate that life is nothing else but a special form of existence of matter"
Marx and Engels adapted Hegel's ideas about what happens in the mental realm to explain
what happens in the material world.? This hybrid philosophy is called dialectical materialism.
The world, according to Engels, is always changing, always evolving, 30 The goal is to always
move forward, to be progressive. Nothing lasts forever. In this "endless maze of relations and
interactions," things are always clashing and changing. Conflict is inevitable. You might
think of conflict as bad. The Marxist, however, wants conflict. It is the only way society will
advance. The main place this conflict takes place, Marxists say, is in the production of goods
and the distribution of wealth. In short, it's all about economics.
Economic determinism. The view that economics
is the foundation for the whole social superstructure is
Economic Determinism:
the belief that economics
determines the entire
course of human history,
ultimately and inevitability
leading to a communist
future.
called economic determinism. Engels wrote, "In every
historical epoch the prevailing mode of economic pro-
duction and exchange, and the social organization nec-
essarily following from it, form the basis upon which is
built up, and from which alone can be explained, the
political and intellectual history of that epoch."32
To the Marxist, the economic struggle between the
bourgeoisie (the property owners) and the proletariat
(the property-less workers) explains everything in
Bourgeoisie: a term used in
Marxist theory to describe
those who own the means
of production.
history-politics, religion, law, and culture.
Today, Marxists apply this analysis by looking at all
kinds of conflicts between the haves and have-nots, the
religious and nonreligious, blacks and whites, men and
women, heterosexuals and homosexuals— as evidence of
the dialectic process at work. Such conflicts are proxies
for the true struggle. Scratch any conflict, and it will
Proletariat: a term used in
Marxist theory to describe
the working-class wage
earners who do not own
the means of production.
bleed economics.
Socialism and communism are both part of the
Marxis's economic vocabulary, but they are not in-
terchangeable terms. To the Marxist, socialism is the
first phase or first step in the transition to the perfect
economic system, which is communism. Socialism
begins with heavy taxation, government takeover of businesses, and the elimination of laws
protecting private property. Eventually the government, which previously existed to keep
the exploiters in power, will cease to exist. Government won't be needed anymore because
economic classes will cease to exist and the means of production will be owned in common.
This state of existence is called communism, which means "working in common"3t
Some think they can date socialism without having to marry communism. Marxists,
however, don't see it that way. Socialism inevitably becomes communism, they say. As for
«Cellow-traveling" liberals and progressives who do not recognize this and whom communists
easily mislead and manipulate, they are—according to
Lenin- "dupes" and "useful idiots."35
Let's review for a moment. Dialectical materialism
says that only nature exists and that through the conflict
of opposites (thesis and antithesis), society will evolve
(synthesis). Economic determinism says this evolution is
Some think they can date
socialism without having
to marry communism.
Marxists, however,
don't see it that way.
an economic process in which society moves to a more
enlightened state of common ownership of the means of
production, no one is exploited, and everyone works together. Christianity—and all religions,
for that matter—will be overthrown because people will see religion as a trick used to keep
them from standing up against injustice. Capitalism, democracy, and the free exchange of
goods and services will also be overthrown by newer, better ideas. To Marxists, this is the
course of history. It cannot be stopped.
4. MARXISM AS A WORLDVIEW
According to Marxists, not a single aspect of society is untouched by the inevitable conflict
between the reigning economic class and the oppressed economic class. The evolutionary
compulsion to eliminate economic injustice drives and explains all of human history. There-
fore, people who embrace dialectical materialism and economic determinism have something
to say about everything else.
Marxism prides itself on being a thinking-person's worldview. All good philosophers,
Marxists believe, will be good Marxists. Marx said, "The head of the emancipation is philoso-
phy, its heart is the proletariat? The author of a prominent philosophy book published in the
USSR in the 1980s said, "One cannot become a fully conscious, convinced communist without
studying Marxist philosophy. This is what Lenin taught?"* Marxist philosophy isn't just pie-in-
the-sky theory, though. "The philosophers have only interpreted the world in various ways"
Marx stated. "The point, however, is to change it"38
To the Marxist, then, there is no such thing as pure philosophy-or pure anything else. As
we will se later in this volume, Marxists want to capture every academic discipline and put it
to work fomenting revolution. And we need to pay careful attention. We will start by peering
beyond the Marxist idea of revolution into the Marxist idea of revelation-both general and
special- to see what sources Marxist turn to in forming their plans for the world.


<!-- page-6 (book p.109) -->

5. GENERAL REVELATION: WHAT MARXISTS SEE WHEN THEY LOOK AT
THE WORLD
Marxists believe there are laws of nature we can actually discover. One definite law,
according to Marx, was the law of evolution. Marx loved Darwin's Origin of Species because
it dealt a "death-blow... to teleology [design in nature)."o F. V. Konstantinov, in The Fun-
damentals of Marxist-Leninist Philosophy, echoes Marx: "Darwin put an end to the notion
of the species of animals and plants as divine creations, not connected with anything else,
providential and immutable, and thus laid the foundation of theoretical biology"4)
As Marx studied Darwin's work, he became convinced that evolution could explain human
progress as well as the survival of the fittest in nature. In other words, evolution wasn't just
biological; it was sociological. Lenin put it this way: "Just as Darwin put an end to the view
of animal and plant species being unconnected, fortuitous, 'created by God' and immutable,
and was the first to put biology on an absolutely scientific basis ... so Marx... was the first to
put sociology on a scientific basis.*42
The application of evolution to society as well as biology is a central tenet of Marxism.
Today, the belief in progress is often called progressivism, though we must be clear that not
all progressives are Marxists. To embrace a belief in
constant progress, people must give up their belief in
As Marx studied Darwin's
work, he became convinced
that evolution could
explain human progress as
well as the survival of the
fittest in nature.
a rational, purposeful, powerful God whose plans and
purposes do not involve economic overthrow. Any
"god" who would frown on economic overthrow must
not, to Marxists, be allowed to exist. Marx and Engels
considered evolution to be an important companion
belief to Marxism. If evolution sneezes, Marxism will
catch a cold. On the other hand, if evolution goes into
cardiac arrest, Marxism's brain waves cease.
Further, Marxists are forced to embrace spontaneous generation — the idea of life arising
from nonliving matter. Marx boasted, "The idea of the creation of the earth has received a
severe blow...from the science which portrays the... development of the earth as a process of
spontaneous generation... Generatio equivoca (spontaneous generation] is the only practical
refutation of the theory of creation 43
Engels held firm his belief in spontaneous generation when new scientific discovery
placed it in doubt. Louis Pasteur (1822-1895) dealt the deathblow to spontaneous generation,
but Engels was unconvinced: "Pasteur's attempts in this direction are useless; for those who
believe in this possibility (of spontaneous generation) he will never be able to prove their
impossibility by these experiments alone?* This, of course, is a statement of faith, not science.
It may not be blind faith exactly, but, ugly it is visible only to those who would believe it
regardless of the evidence.
What does the Marxist say about special revelation, about the things we cannot know
by observation but must be revealed to us? With each worldview, we've sought to answer
five questions:
1. On what sources of revelation does Marxism draw on?
2. What does this worldview say about humanity?
3. What does this worldview say is wrong with us?
4. What does this worldview say about how we should live?
5. How are we to understand other worldviews based on Marxism?
6. SPECIAL REVELATION: HOW MARXISTS ANSWER THE ULTIMATE
QUESTIONS
1. On what sources of revelation does Marxism draw? As we've already noted, Marxists
put their faith in the evolution of society through economic conflict. Like Snow White, the
workers of the world are in a deathly stupor, victims of a spell cast by their oppressors: business
owners, religious leaders, and politicians. This spell is broken when workers discover their
true plight, throw off their chains, and form a workers' paradise in which everyone works
according to their ability and takes only what they need. To those who have felt the lash of
oppression, this narrative is deeply compelling. But why would Marxists believe it is true?
What sort of revelation convinces them?
The Communist Manifesto is, according to one of its modern-day publishers, a work of
"great prescience and power"45 Commissioned by the Communist League and written by
Marx and Engels, the manifesto laid out the leagues purposes and program. It suggested a
course of action for a proletarian revolution to overthrow capitalism and, eventually, to bring
about a classless society.
Since the time of The Communist Manifesto, communists have formed various schools of
intellectual thought (such as the Frankfurt School of Theodor Adorno and Herbert Marcuse),
terrorist groups (such as the Red Brigades), and even interest groups (such as the Communist
Party USA and International ANSWER). Prominent Marxist thinkers from the last hundred
years include Herbert Aptheker, William Z. Foster, Paul Robeson, Gerda Lerner, Eric Foner,
Howard Zinn, Antonio Gramsci, Gyorgy Lukacs, Walter Benjamin, and Eric Hobsbawn.
At the dawn of the twenty-first century, Michael Hardt and Antonio Negri audaciously
set out to update The Communist Manifesto for today's global situation. Their book, Empire,
was published in 2000. The National Review referred to Empire as "the Communist hot, smart
book of the moment » and Foreign Affairs magazine called it a "sweeping neo-Marxist vision
of the coming world order"4 Hardt is a professor at Duke University who, according to Dukes
website, teaches a couple of classes each semester and spends three hours in the office each
week. Negri's career, on the other hand, is much more colorful. His association with the Red
Brigades terrorist organization in Italy landed him in prison several decades ago. While behind
Dars, Negri won election to the Italian Parlament. Consequently, he claimed parlamentary
immunity, was released from prison, and escaped to France, where he lived and taught for
tourteen years. Eventually Negrind Kau ned to Italy to serve a reduced sentence Of six years.
Harvard University Press described Empire, published in the middle of Negris prison term,
as "an unabashedly utopian work of Fan sted Philosophy, a new Communist Manifesto. Hardt
and Negri blame the United States, and specifically the US Constitution, for reengineering
imperialism into a brutal, world-dominating ideology. 48 Four years after publishing Empire,
they published the follow-up woomoultitude, which called for people to rise up and attack


<!-- page-7 (book p.111) -->

capitalism. In 2009, the authors published Commonwealth to articulate specific ideas about
how they would "govern the revolution" by holding wealth in common. This, the authors say,
involves reimagining the opposition between the ideas of "public" and "private?" It's a ruse,
of course; reimagining the difference between public and private is the justification robbers
give for reappropriating your wealth. Marx and Engels would probably be somewhat awed
by the audacity of this project, and certainly proud.
2. What does Marxism say about humanity? Engels believed thought and consciousness
were "products of the human brain and that man himself is a product of nature, which has
been developed in and along with its environment." He further stated, "All nature, from
the smallest thing to the biggest, from a grain of sand to the sun, from the Protista [the
primary living cell| to man, is in a constant state of coming into being and going out of
being, in a constant flux, in a ceaseless state of movement and change?"50
So everything is material. Humans are really nothing
more than matter in motion, but they are always evolving
Class Consciousness:
the belief that the
working class is becoming
increasingly aware of their
position in society and
their oppression by the
bourgeoisie.
and hopefully growing in their class consciousness, their
awareness of their oppressed state." This, in turn, will
motivate a new ethic, a proletariat morality, to justify
whatever actions Marxists take to overthrow our existing
social conditions. According to Scientific Communism:
A Glossary,
Devotion to the cause of the working class, collectiv-
ism, mutual aid, comradery, solidarity, hatred toward
the bourgeoisie and toward traitors to the common
Proletariat Morality:
the belief that whatever
advances the proletariat
and communism is morally
good, and whatever
hinders the proletariat
and communism is
morally evil.
cause, internationalism, and stoicism in struggle are
traits which not only define the content of proletarian
ethics, but also characterize the moral image of the
typical representatives of the working class.5
Based on proletariat morality, hard-core Marxists
openly admit that killing the bourgeoisie was a basic
duty. "We are exterminating the bourgeoisie as a class,"
said Martin Y. Latsis, a top official of Lenin's secret
police." Latsis and his comrades were quite candid. They
saw their actions as moral, as necessary to creating their "better" world. Nikita Khrushchev,
president of the USSR after Stalin, explained:
Our cause is sacred. He whose hand will tremble, who will stop midway, whose knees
will shake before he destroys tens and hundreds of enemies, he will lead the revolution
into danger. Whoever will spare a few lives of enemies, will pay for it with hundreds
and thousands of lives of the better sons of our fathers.54
The evolved person's class consciousness leads to a new form of moralitv, one which
erases his sense of mercy toward his former oppressors. In this heightened state he can
control his destiny and eliminate those whose backward ways slow society's advance toward
true communism.
3. What does Marxism say is wrong with us? The problem with society is an economic
one to the Marxist. Marx said that in a capitalist society, the bourgeoisie equate personal worth
with exchange value. leading to "naked, shameless, direct, brutal exploitation." Marxism
rejects the Christian view of the sin nature, that we are all corrupt and in need of a savior.
The exploiters alone are guilty, and there is no salvation apart from their overthrow, which
will lead to rapid societal transformation.56
William Z. Foster was one of those who believed the principles that built the Soviet
Union could transform America as well. His 1932 book, Toward Soviet America, breathlessly
proposed an ambitious vision for education in a future communist America. Foster wrote,
Among the elementary measures the American Soviet government will adopt to further
the cultural revolution are the following: the schools, colleges and universities will be
coordinated and grouped under the National Department of Education and its state
and local branches. The studies will be revolutionized, being cleansed of religious,
patriotic and other features of the bourgeois ideology. The students will be taught on
the basis of Marxian dialectical materialism, internationalism and the general ethics
of the new Socialist society.5
Foster continued, "Science will become materialistic, hence truly scientific; God will be
banished from the laboratories as well as from the schools?"58
This must have sounded laughably ridiculous to his readers at the time. But go back and
read Foster's statements once more. How much of his vision has already taken place?
If Foster were ever to achieve his vision for education, he had a chilling plan for the next
step: dismantling the influence of the church. "The churches will remain free to continue
their services" Foster stated, "but ... other privileges will be liquidated. Their buildings will
revert to the State. Religious schools will be abolished and organized religious training for
minors prohibited. Freedom will be established for anti-religious propaganda."59
Foster wasn't just some nut with a typewriter. He was a true believer, a prominent union
organizer, one of the earliest board members and top officials at the American Civil Liberties
Union (ACLU), and a would-be dictator who honestly believed the United States could atone
for its sins by forfeiting its capitalistic interests and submitting to the Soviet Union. Foster's
enthusiastic support of the murderous Stalin made him such a complete ally of the Soviet
Union that upon his death he was given a state funeral in Moscow's Red Square, complete
with an honor guard headed by Soviet president Nikita Khrushchev.
At every step along the way, Marxists see the human problem as someone else's problem—
property owners are devilish, and the property-less workers are saintly.
Before we move on, an important side note is in order about a word game being played in
our modern society concerning the freedom-of religion question. The Soviet Union and many
other communist countries included the freedom of worship in their constitutions. This was
mere windowdressing, propaganda to try to deflet criticism of the severe religious repression
that everyone knew communists pursued relentlessly. At best, phony pledges of freedom of
worship mean the freedom to assemble for worship services, which is very different from the
freedom to live out one's religious convictions in a lawful manner. If you hear someone use
the expression "freedom of worship" in place of "freedom of religion" in referring to the US
Constitution, you should be very suspicious. Either that person is truly misinformed or is


<!-- page-8 (book p.113) -->

playing word games to try to change what the freedom
At best, phony pledges of
freedom of worship mean
the freedom to assemble
for worship services, which
is very different from the
freedom to live out one's
religious convictions in a
lawful manner.
of religion means.6
4. What does Marxism say about how we should
live? Marxists see the march toward socialism and even-
tually communism as a historical inevitability. This is
where social evolution will take us; resistance is futile.
Those who march alongside will become free; and to
those who resist, the Marxist says, "We know who you
are and where you live; we will not be able to protect
you when the revolution comes."
So how do Marxists say we should live, specifically? Those with a budding class con-
sciousness will establish socialism, abolishing private property and eliminating class divisions.
Since government exists only to protect the oppressors, once there are no more oppressors,
government will no longer be needed. According to Lenin, "Only in Communist society
when the resistance of the capitalists has been completely broken, when the capitalists have
disappeared, when there are no classes... only then the State ceases to exist."61
The revolt of the workers brings oppression to an end and establishes socialism. As so-
cialism becomes established, oppression will cease, government will become unnecessary,
and we will have true communism. Or will we? If humans continue to evolve, who's to say
that communism is the final state? Marxists spend little time worrying about this contradic-
tion. They're convinced that if they can just spark the revolution, everything else will take
care of itself.
5. How are we to understand other worldviews based on Marxism? As you can imagine,
Marxists strongly disagree with the other worldviews we are considering, but for different
reasons than we do. Let's take a look at Marxism's views of them.
Christianity. Of all of the worldviews we've considered in this book, Karl Marx would
probably consider Christianity the most insidious. His statement "Religion is the sigh of
the oppressed creature, the heart of a heartless world, and the soul of soulless conditions.
It is the opium of the people" was most likely directed at Christianity. Christianity, he
wrote, justified slavery, defended oppression, and taught Christians to seek their reward
in heaven rather than on Earth. It preaches "self-contempt, abasement, submissiveness
and humbleness, in short, all the qualities of the rabble, and the proletariat, which will not
permit itself to be treated as rabble, needs its courage, its self-confidence, its pride and its
sense of independence even more than its bread"63
The hatred is not mutual. Some Christians sympathetic to the plight of the poor regularly
scour Scripture to find evidence justifying Marxism. Marxists think this is silly and naive.
In their minds. the two worldviews are fundamentallv at odds. Christian leftists may open
chapter on economics.
their arms, but Marxists reject the embrace. We'll examine this issue more thoroughly in the
Secularism. In the United States, claims New York Times columnist Ross Douthat, com-
munism remained a "tribal phenomenon" that was "never a mass phenomenon in the Wa
that the new secularism seems to be, or seems capable of becoming. It was an intellectual
tribe, but not a political demographic"64 It was not for want of trving Secularist leader John
Dewey, prominent in forming America's system of public education and a former leader of
the socialistic League for Industrial Democracy, believed socialism was the best economic
system.' He claimed that "social control of economic forces is ... necessary if anything ap-
proaching economic equality and liberty is to be realized Dewey's worldview coincided
with that of Karl Marx: we must embrace socialism to be truly free.
Dewey believed society would fail if it did not embrace socialism: "The cause ofliberalism.
will be lost for a considerable period if it is not prepared to go further and socialize the forces
of production, now at hand, so that the liberty of individuals will be supported by the very
structure of economic organization." He even believed socialism was the key to freedom,
stating that a "socialized economy is the means of free individual development as the end"68
The Soviet Union saw John Dewey's writings on education as the means of fulfilling the
demand of The Communist Manifesto for "free education for all children in public schools."
Dewey traveled to the Soviet Union and upon his return wrote a glowing tribute in a special
series of articles for one of the top journals of the American progressive left. Only years
later, in response to Stalin's persecution of Leon Trotsky, did Dewey waver in his affinity for
the Soviet regime. John Dewey's student Corliss Lamont (one of the founders of Secular
Humanism) was even more enamored of the Soviet Union than Dewey. He even headed up
Friends of the Soviet Union, which historian Paul Kengor calls an "odious front group"70
New Spirituality. It is difficult to tell whether there is any convergence between New
Spirituality and Marxism in practice, but in theory the two worldviews are radically different.
Marxism strongly critiques all religion because it draws energy away from anti-capitalist fervor.
Marxism's denial of any transcendent reality would draw protests from New Spiritualists, and
they see Marxism's brutal way of pursuing its aims as a manifestation of negative energy and
ego. In their comments on economics, however infrequent, New Spiritualists tend to focus
on individualistic pursuits rather than rejection of capitalist structures.
Still, Marxism and New Spirituality do have a common grandfather. Georg Hegel, the philos-
opher whose "dialectic" approach is so fundamental to Marxist thinking, wrote frequently of the
"over-soul," the "Soul of Nature, which bears more than
a passing resemblance to the New Spirituality belief in a
higher consciousness. Philosopher and mystic Ken Wilber
has incorporated Hegel's thinking into New Spiritualist
teachings. To speculate any further, though, would be to
stretch the connections beyond where either Marxists or
New Spiritualists have been willing to go. It is probably
safest to say that Marxists would view New Spiritualists
as muddle headed and unscientific, and New Spiritualists
would view Marxists as well meaning but egoistic.
Islam. Muslims see their economic approach as a
middle way between capitalism and socialism. Muslim
Hegel, the philosopher
whose "dialectic"
approach is so
fundamental to Marxist
thinking, wrote frequently
of the "over-soul," the
"Soul of Nature," which
bears more than a passing
resemblance to the New
Spirituality belief in a
higher consciousness.
economist Syed Nawab Haider Naqvi defines socialism as
"the abolition of private property. This is also Karl Marx's
definition in The Communist Manifesto.?"' In turn, Naqui refers to capitalism as the unlimited
freedom of private property, which divorces ethics from economics. To Muslims, economic


<!-- page-9 -->

justice requires economic well-being for arather vers. To accomplish this, instituted within
Islam are zakat (almsgiving for the sake of the poor), jizya (taxes levied against unbelievers
within the Islamic community), and laws regarding inheritance.
On the issue of private property, Naqvi contends that Islamic economics rejects so-
cialism's negation of private property but also rejects capitalism's alleged absolute view of
private property. "Within the framework of a set of ground rules, individual economic)
freedom should be guaranteed, but the state should be allowed to regulate it in cases where
the exercise of individual freedom becomes inconsistent with social welfare?" Naqvi also
insists, "As to the ownership of private propertyl,] especially of land ownership, it has been
restricted in various ways. For instance, individuals cannot own uncultivated lands, forests,
grazing grounds, mines, etc. All these must be owned
by the public authority for public welfare"7 In the end,
In the end, while
Marxists maintain a
critique of all religion,
Islam is probably not as
threatening to Marxism
as Christianity. Islam
is suspicious of private
property, which, as far as
Marxists are concerned, is
at least a move in the right
direction.
while Marxists maintain a critique of all religion, Islam
is probably not as threatening to Marxism as Christi-
anity. Islam is suspicious of private property, which, as
far as Marxists are concerned, is at least a move in the
right direction.
Postmodernism. One might think that since both
Marxists and Postmodernists take a critical stance to-
ward dominant narratives, especially religious ones,
they might be in agreement on many points. As the
"Postmodernism" chapter in this book will show, many
Postmodernists came out of the Marxist tradition. In
fact, some of them viewed their project as making
Marxism respectable. The postmodern obsession with the language of oppression, ac-
cording to literature professor Gene Edward Veith, comes directly from Marxist thought.*
In another sense, though, Postmodernism is as post-Marxist as it is post-everything-else.
A Marxist website, League for the Fifth International, which proclaims as its objective "fight-
ing for the formation of a new world party of socialist revolution, identifies seven aspects of
Postmodernism that it says Marxists must reject. It focuses primarily on Postmodernism's
suspicion of scientific thought and the inevitability of communism based on social evolution?
Fredric Jameson, a professor at Duke University and an openly enthusiastic champion of
Marxism, took a dialectic view of Pargued, lernism, pitting it against commercial capitalisms
"colonization" of the culture. Though his argument is nuanced, the title of his book on the
subject, Postmodernism, or, the Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism, seems to imply that Post-
modernism was just another form of opposition rising against capitalism. This, he argued.
is a good thing, but it too shall pass?
7. CONCLUSION
If vou were to imply in polite company that communism is still a relevant concern, youd
likely endure a lot of smirking and eve rolling, It has been said that the fear of being laughed
at makes cowards of us all. Unfortunatelv it's often true. Most choose to be quiet rather
than compel the mockers and scorners to define their terms and provide actual arguments
justifying their views. With other worldviews we have honest disagreements. With Marxisn
it is hard to find common ground with the most violent, oppressive, and murderous system
of thought ever constructed, a system many hundreds of times worse than the injustices it
was supposed to rectify.
Some rationalize that while violent overthrows, labor camps, and systematic genocide
are bad, communism and socialism are, in theory, harmless. This is breathtakingly naive.
Whenever humans plant seeds of a massive centralized overhaul of society, the noxious
weeds of corruption, violence, and oppression inevitably spring forth from the parched soil.
You do not need to take our word for it; Marxism's proponents could hardly be clearer.
As we quoted earlier from The Communist Manifesto, Marx said, "The Communists disdain
to conceal their views and aims. They openly declare that their ends can be attained only by
the forcible overthrow of all existing social conditions" The Communist Manifesto is a pre-
scription for despotism. As Marx himself conceded, prefacing his ten points: "Of course, in
the beginning, this cannot be effected except by means of despotic inroads." Marxism wasn't
hijacked by despots; Marxism demanded despots.
How did this work out in practice? In 1918, Marxists attempted to rapidly institute social-
ism in Russia by seizing land from its owners. The Soviet constitution proclaimed "all private
property in land is abolished, and the entire land is declared to be national property and is
to be apportioned among agriculturists without any compensation to the former owners, in
the measure of each one's ability to till it."78
The head revolutionary, V. I. Lenin, quickly realized that the Russian economy would
never survive such a rapid move to socialism. In 1921 he declared,
We are no longer attempting to break up the old social economic order, with its trade,
its small-scale economy and private initiative, its capitalism, but we are now trying to
revive trade, private enterprise and capitalism, at the same time gradually and cautiously
subjecting them to state regulation just as far as they revive.??
During the transition period, Lenin experimented with a number of social methods to
hasten the arrival of socialism and communism. Frustrated at how people lost their motiva-
tion to work when they could not personally benefit, Lenin demanded imprisonment, forced
labor, and executions: "One out of every ten idlers will be shot on the spot."0
Lenin's easy resort to violence and force should cause any rational person to wonder
what kind of system he was creating. Isn't this immoral? In order to answer that question we
must understand that Marxism proposes an entirely different definition of morality than the
definition Christianity proposes. Nikita Khrushchev stated,
So long as classes exist on the earth, there will be no such thing in life as something
good in the absolute sense. What is good for the bourgeoisie, for the imperialists, is
disastrous for the working class, and, on the contrary, what is good for the working
people is not admitted by the imperialists, by the bourgeoisie.
This, then, is the whole problem with the old morality as Marxists perceive it- the old
morality is simply a tool oppressors use to maintain their power. Lenin himself explicitly
rejected Christian ethics as a tool of the exploiters:


<!-- page-10 -->

Is there such a thing as communist morality? Of course there is. It is often suggested
that we have no ethics of our own; very often the bourgeoisie accuse us Communists of
rejecting all morality. This is a method of confusing the issue, of throwing dust in the
eyes of the workers and peasants. In what sense do we reject ethics, reject morality? In
the sense given to it by the bourgeoisie, who based ethics on God's commandments. On
this point we, of course, say that we do not believe in God, and that we know perfectly
well that the clergy, the landowners and the bourgeoisie invoked the name of God so
as to further their own interests as exploiters.®2
This is not to say that all Marxists are evil atheists hell bent on violence. But about this
there can be no question: every time Marxism has been tried at a national level, terror and
Marxism in the twentieth century openly justified mistreating its opponents by claiming
it would serve the "higher good" in the long run. A good example of how this occurred is
Lenins-and subsequently Stalin's-extermination of the Ukrainian farmers who did not
want to cooperate with the Communist Party's aims. When he recognized that his efforts to
rapidly move toward socialism were failing, Lenin wrote that he would be willing to work
with the "petty bourgeois proprietors" as long as their work furthered the Marxist cause, but
"after that our roads part. Then we shall have to engage in the most decisive, ruthless struggle
Ultimately, Lenin declared that these farmers, which he called kulaks, needed to be
eliminated as a class. They were not "human beings,"* he said, and thus he viewed them as
legitimate objects of "economic terror"5 Stalin took Lenin's philosophy to heart, stating, "To
put it briefly: the dictatorship of the proletariat is the domination of the proletariat over the
bourgeoisie, untrammeled by the law and based on violence and enjoying the sympathy and
support of the toiling and exploited masses. Consistent with his rhetoric, Stalin announced
on December 27, 1929, "the liquidation of the kulaks as a class."7
Ivan Bahryany, a Ukrainian citizen who estimates
The unmarked graves
of tens of millions
testify to the horrifying
consequences of Marx's
grand vision.
that the Soviets killed ten million of his countrymen
between 1927 and 1939, concluded, "The party clique
which follows the slogan expressed by the saying the
end justifies the means' is actually always ready to use
any means"88
Clearly, then, Marxism views violence as temporarily
necessary and not morally questionable. Marx, Lenin,
Stalin, and a host of other Marxist heroes saw it as a moral duty to overthrow the exploiters by
any means necessary. It was well worth the price paid, said Lenin, "even if for every hundred
correct things we committed 10,000 mistakes, our revolution would still be-and it will be
in the judgment of history-great and invincible
That Lenin and those who followed him were becoming exploiters of an even more brutal
sort either did not register with (or was ignored by) the leaders who had the power to stop
it. The unmarked graves of tensorpillions testify to the horrifying consequences of Marx's
grand vision. It is in many ways a reaction to Marxism's totalitarianism that many other
worldviews began to forsake the idea of ruling by force and began to turn inward, toward
- 1ib -
spiritual enlightenment rather than societal change. Such is the case with the worldview of
New Spirituality, which we will examine next.
ENDNOTES
1. Paul Johnson, Intellectuals (New York: Harper Perennial, 1988), 71-81.
2. Johnson, Intellectuals, 60.
3. Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, The Communist Manifesto, trans. Samuel Moore (New York: Penguin Books, 2002), 258.
4. Alexander Yakovlev, in his important work A Century of Violence in Soviet Russia (New Haven, CT: Yale University
Press, 2002), estimated that Stalin's regime alone killed more than 60 million.
5. Jung Chang and Jon Halliday record the latest figures of 70-million-plus killed under China's Mao Tse-tung in
their seminal work, Mao: The Unknown Story (New York: Anchor, 2006).
6. Political scientist R. J. Rummel estimates that communism killed about 110 million people in the twentieth century
(R. J. Rummel, "How Many Did Communist Regimes Murder?,' November 1993, posted at University of Hawaii,
accessed April 2, 2014, www.hawaii.edu/powerkills/COM.ART.HTM), while Stéphane Courtois, in The Black Book of
Communism: Crimes, Terror, Repression (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1999), estimates that communist
regimes killed nearly 100 million in the twentieth century.
7. Sutirtho Patranobis, "China to Ease One-Child Policy: State Media," Hindustan Times, November 16, 2013, www
.hindustantimes.com/world/china-to-ease-one-child-policy-state-media/story-Y7DluFOURVx5au7EGCyA7L.html.
8. George Santayana, The Life of Reason (Middlesex, UK: Echo Library, 2006), 131. The original publication was titled
The Life of Reason: Or the Phases of Human Progress (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1906). The quotation in this
earlier volume was on page 284.
9. Edmund Burke, The Works of Edmund Burke (New York: George Dearborn, 1834), 1:187.
10. Alvaro Vargas Llosa, "The Killing Machine: Che Guevara, from Communist Firebrand to Capitalist Brand," New
Republic, July 11, 2005, www.independent.org/newsroom/article.asp?id=1535.
11. These countries, at the time of writing, have constitutional references to socialism as their official policies.
12. See William J. Federer, Change to Chains (St. Louis, MO: Amerisearch, 2011), 81. Federer says, "In Sumeria about
2100 BC, the economy was organized by the State. Most of the arable land was the property of the crown; laborers
received rations from the crops delivered to the royal storehouses ... [and] records were kept of all deliveries and
distributions of nations. Tens of thousands of clay tablets inscribed with such records were found in the capital Ur.
In Babylonia (c. 1750 BC)[,] the law code of Hammurabi fixed wages for the herdsmen and artisans, and the charges
to be made by physicians for operations. In Egypt under the Ptolemies (323-30 BC)[,1 the state owned the soil and
managed the agriculture; the peasant was told what land to till, what crops to growl:] his harvest was measured and
registered by government scribes, was threshed on royal threshing floors, and was conveyed by a living chain of
fellahen into the granaries of the king. The government owned the mines and appropriated the ore. It nationalized
the production and sale of oil, salt, papyrus, and textiles. All commerce was controlled and regulated by the
Statel(:)... banking was a government monopoly. Taxes were laid upon every person, industry, process, product,
sale, and legal document. Roman Emperor Diocletian brought nearly all major industries and guilds under detailed
control... taxation rose to such heights that men lost incentive to work or earn... Thousands of Romans, to escape
the tax gatherer, fled over the frontiers to seek refuge among the barbarians. Chinese Szuma Chien (c. 146 BC)
informs us that to prevent individuals from reserving to their sole use the riches of the mountains and the sea
in order to gain a fortune, and from putting the lower class into subjection to themselves; the Emperor Wu TI
of the Han Dynasty (reigning 140-87 BC) nationalized the resources of the soil, extended government direction
over transport and trade, laid a tax upon incomes, and established public works, including canals that bound the
rivers together and irrigated the fields. These stories, recounted by Will and Ariel Durant (The Lessons of Histor,
underscore the continual drive for States to control citizens lives, and highlight the truly unusual alignment of
cireumstances and beliefs which allowed for the formation of the United States of America:"
13. "The Rise of State Capitalism; Economist January 21, 2012, www.economist.com/node/215436ra.
14. The development of state capitalism is illustrated specifically in Russia, China, and Brazil, where state
governments have taken ownership of oil companies, telecom companies, and mining operations, respectively. Fo
2011, 80 percent of the Chinese companies in the MSCI stock index were government-run companies. Sixty-tw
percent of the Russian companies in the MSCI were government run, as were 38 percent of Brazilian companies
listed. In 2010, four of the ten top revenue-earning companies in the world were state run: Sinope Group ($413
billion, China), China National Petroleum Corporation ($240 billion, China), State Grid ($226 billion, China), an
biggest 150 companies.
Japan Post Holdings ($204 billion, Japan). In China, the government is the biggest shareholder for the country's


<!-- page-11 -->

15. If you are interested, you can follow Folsom's line of thinking at Burt Folsom, Where History, Money and Politics
Collide, (blog), www.burtfolsom.com/.
16. Arnold Beichman, Immune from the Shortages," Washington Times, December 31, 1990, G3.
17. Quoted in Beichman, "Immune from the Shortages."
18. "Marxism in U.S. Classrooms, U.S. News and World Report, January 8, 1982, quoted in Tra Shor, Culture Wars: School
and Society in the Conservative Restoration 1969-1984 (London: Routledge, 1986).
19. Herbert London, "Marxism Thriving on American Campuses" The World and I, January 1987, www
.worldandischool.com/public/1987/january/school-resourcel2337.asp.
20. Terry Eagleton, "Why Marx Was Right," Yale University Press, April 24, 2012, http://yalepress.yale.edu/yupbooks
/reviews.asp?isbn-9780300181531 (content moved as of February 8, 2016).
21. Stuart Jeffries, Why Marxism Is on the Rise Again, Guardian, July 4, 2012, www.guardian.co.uk/world/2012
/jul/04/the-return-of-marxism.
22. Martha E. Gimenez, "Marxism and Class, Gender, and Race: Rethinking the Trilogy," Race, Gender, and Class 8,
no. 2(2001): 23-33.
23. Essence magazine, bell hooks's review of Remembered Rapture (Henry Holt, 1999), Macmillan Publishers, accessed
March 18, 2014, http://us.macmillan.com/rememberedrapture/bellhooks. Adopted as a pen name, bell hooks is the
name of hooks's grandmother and is set in lowercase because "hooks] believes that what is most important is the
'substance of books, not who 1 am." Heather Williams, "bell hooks Speaks Up," Sandspur, February 10, 2006, http://
archive.is/K5Yxn#selection-553.297-553.380.
24. Quoted in Jamie Glazov, "bell hooks and the Politics of Hate," frontpagemag.com, June 12, 2002, accessed
February 8, 2016, http://archive.frontpagemag.com/readArticle.aspx?ARTID=25297.
25. In one such rally, covered by the national media, the keynote speaker was a New York University professor
and devout Marxist Slavoj Zižek, who once wrote, "One should shamelessly repeat the lesson of Lenin's State and
Revolution." Quoted in Alan Johnson, "The New Communism: Resurrecting the Utopian Delusion," World Affairs
Journal (May/June 2012).
26. See Gustav A. Wetter, Dialectical Materialism (Westport, CT: Greenwood, 1977), 4. Wetter stated, "In Hegel's sense
of the term, dialectic is a process in which a starting-point [a thesis, e.g., Being] is negated [the antithesis, e.g., Non-
Being), thereby setting up a second position opposed to it. This second position is in turn negated i.e., by negation
of the negation, so as to reach a third position representing a synthesis [e.g., Becoming) of the two preceding, in
which both are 'transcended, i.e., abolished and at the same time preserved on a higher level of being. This third
phase then figures in turn as the first step in a new dialectical process [i.e., a new thesis], leading to a new synthesis,
and so on."
27. Frederick Engels, Socialism: Utopian and Scientific (New York: International Publishers, 1935), 21.
28. Quoted in Whittaker Chambers, Witness (New York: Random House, 1952), 712.
29. V. I. Lenin, Collected Works, 45 vols. (Moscow: Progress Publishers, 1977), 7:409. Lenin wrote of the "great Hegelian
dialectics which Marxism made its own, having first turned it right side up."
30. Frederick Engels, Ludwig Feuerbach (New York: International Publishers, 1974), 44.
31. V. I. Lenin, The Teachings of Karl Marx (New York: International Publishers, 1976), 27.
32. Marx and Engels, Communist Manifesto, 202-3.
33. See Raymond Sleeper, ed., A Lexicon of Marist-Leninist Semantics (Alexandria, VA: Western Goals, 1983), 249.
According to Sleeper, The Political Dictionary defines "socialism las) the first phase of communism. The principle of
socialism is: from each according to his abilities, to each according to his work... Under communism the basic
principle of society will be: from each according to his abilities, to each according to his needs."
34. V. I. Lenin, Selected Works, 38 vols. (New York: International Publishers, 1938), 9:479.
35. Paul Kengor, Dupes (Wilmington, DE: ISI Books, 2010).
36. Quoted in Johnson, Intellectuals, 58-59.
37. F. V. Konstantinov, ed. The Fundamentals of Marxist-Leninist Philosophy (Moscow: Progress Publishers, 1982), 78.
38. Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Collected Works, 40 vols. (New York: International Publishers, 1976), 5:8.
39, Karl Marx, Frederick Engels, and V. 1. Lenin, On Historical Materialism (New Xork: International Publishers, 1974),
40. Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Selected Correspondence (New York: International Publishers, 1942), 125.
41. Konstantinov, Fundamentals of Marxist-Leninist Philosophy, 42.
42. Lenin, Collected Works, 1:142.
43. Quoted in Francis Nigel Lee, Communism versus Creation (a-nay, NI: Craig Press, 1969), 68. For a scientific loo
at the major issues involved in the theory of spontaneous generation, see David Berlinski's "On the Origins of Life'
Commentary, February 1, 2006.
44. Frederick Engels, Dialectics of Nature (New York: International Publishers, 1976), 189.
45. From the Verso Books website, publisher of the most recent version of The Communist Manifesto. See www
.versobooks.com/books/1109-the-communist-manifesto.
46. David Pryce-Jones, "Evil Empire, National Review Online, September 17, 2001, 28.
47 "Capsule Review: Empire, Foreign Ajairs (uly/August2000), https://www.foreignaffairs.com/reviews/capsule-review
2000-07-01/empire.
48. Hardt and Negri, Empire. On page 207 the authors say, "Our pilgrimage on earth, however, in contrast to
Augustine's, has no transcendent telos beyond (purpose beyond this world; it is and remains absolutely immanent
(here and now). Its continuous movement, gathering aliens in community, making this world its home, is both
means and end, or rather a means without [an] end."
49. Lenin, Teachings of Karl Marx, 14.
50. Engels, Dialectics of Nature, 13.
51. Karl Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy (New York: International Publishers, 1904), 11-12. Marx
said, "It is not the consciousness of men that determines their existence, but, on the contrary, their social existence
determines their consciousness." This view is identical to that of existentialists, who insist that existence precedes
essence, and thus attractive to both Marxists and Postmodernists.
52. Quoted in Sleeper, Lexicon of Marxist-Leninist Semantics, 106.
53. Quoted in Courtois, Black Book of Communism, 8.
54. Nikita Khrushchev, Ukrainian Bulletin (August 1960): 12, quoted in James D. Bales, Communism and the Reality of
Moral Law (Nutley, NJ: Craig Press, 1969), 121.
55. Marx and Engels, Collected Works, 6:487.
56. Marx said, "With the change of the economic foundation the entire immense superstructure is more or less
rapidly transformed." Marx, Contributions to the Critique of Political Economy, 12.
57. William Z. Foster, Toward Soviet America (New York: International Publishers, 1932), 316.
58. Foster, Toward Soviet America, 317.
59. Foster, Toward Soviet America, 316.
60. It is easy to search for this on the Internet using the search term "freedom of religion versus freedom of worship."
Here is one thoughtful article: Randy Sly, "Obama Moves Away from Freedom of Religion' toward Freedom
of Worship'?," Catholic Online, July 19, 2010, accessed March 26, 2014, www.catholic.org/national/nationalstory
php?id=37390.
61. V. I. Lenin, The State and Revolution (New York: International Publishers, 1932), 73.
62. Karl Marx, Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right, trans. Annette Jolin and Joseph O'Malley (Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press, 1970), 131; originally published in Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher.
63. Marx and Engels, Collected Works, 6:231.
64. Ross Douthat, "Secularism and Marxism," Atlantic, June 15, 2007, www.theatlantic.com/personal/archive/2007/06
/secularism-and-marxism/54482/.
65. For an in-depth study of the British Fabian Society, see Sister M. Margaret Patricia McCarran, Fabianism in the
Political Life of Britain, 1919-1931 (Chicago: Heritage Foundation, 1954). For an in-depth look at John Dewey's role
in bringing his brand of socialism into America's public schools, see B. K. Eakman, Cloning of the American Mind:
Eradicating Morality through Education (Lafayette, LA: Huntington House, 1998).
66. John Dewey, Liberalism and Social Action (New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1935), 356-57.
67. Dewey, Liberalism, 88.
68. Dewey, Liberalism, 90.
69. See chapters 4-6 in Kengor, Dupes.
70. Kengor, Dupes, 108.
71. Marx and Engels, Collected Works, 6:498.
72. Syd Nawab Haider Naqvi, Islam, Economics, and Society (London: Kegan Paul International, 1994), 55.
73. Naqvi, Islam, 91.
74. Gene Edward Veith, Postmodern Times (Wheaton, IL: Crossway Books, 1994).
75. "Marxism versus Postmodernism." League for the Fifth International, January 30, 1997, www.fifthinternationa
•org/content/marxism -versus-postmodernism. The complete list is as follows: (1) "There is no objective truth to
be comprehended by scientific thought; (2) there is no pre-given human subject; the human individualıs only
a complex of interrelated outside influences and determinants; (3) language cannot represent reality: therefore,
he concent of ideolopy, where false ideas mask reality, is meaningless; (4) the idea of historical progression and
necessity is meaningless: social formations in history, socioloov and anthropology must be 'mapped'-not judged
or categorised; (5) all social movements or societies based on the possibility of scientific knowledge and object
truth rely on 'grand narratives' rather than inner logic to legitimise them; these 'meta-narratives inevitably lead
to the legitimising of oppression; (6) the class struggle and socialism are precise examples of such meta-narratives;
in any case they have become outmoded by developments in the modern world; (7) the only form or resistance 4


<!-- page-12 -->

oppression that does not lead to another form of oppression is limited, local, piecemeal resistance; the surest form
of resistance is to change ourselves, aspiring ultimately to turn our own lives into a 'work of art."
76. Fredric Jameson, Postmodernism, or, the Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1990).
77. Marx and Engels, Collected Works, 6:519.
78. Harry W. Laidler, History of Socialism (New York: Thomas Y. Crowell, 1968), 384.
79. V. 1. Lenin, written for special Pravda anniversary, November 7, 1921, quoted in Abraham Aaron Heller, The
Industrial Revival in Soviet Russia (New York: Thomas Seltzer, 1922), 105.
80. Lenin, Collected Works, 26:414-15.
81. Nikita Khrushchev, "The Creat Strength of Soviet Literature and Art," Soviet Booklet 108 (London: Farleigh Press,
1963), 30, quoted in James D. Bales, Communism and the Reality of Moral Law (Nutley, NJ: Craig Press, 1969), 5.
82. Lenin, Collected Works, 31:291.
83. Lenin, Collected Works, 36:255, 265.
84. Lenin, Collected Works, 36:129.
85. Lenin, Collected Works, 36:60.
86. Joseph Stalin, J. Stalin Works (Moscow: Foreign Languages, 1953), 6:118.
87. Quoted in Robert Conquest, The Harvest of Sorrow (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1986), 117.
88. Quoted in S. O. Pidhainy, ed., The Black Deeds of the Kremlin (Toronto: Basilian Press, 1953), 14. Robert Conquest
(Harvest of Sorrow, 305) places the figure at 14.5 million.
89. Lenin, Collected Works, 28:72.
