# Chapter 7

<!-- page-1 (book p.147) -->

CHAPTER
1. WHAT Is TRUTH?
It was in 1979, I remember, that my younger brother
died, the first person in my family to be tortured. He
was sixteen years old....
The officer opened the meeting. I remember he started
by saying that a group of guerrillas theyd caught were
about to arrive and that they were going to suffer a
little punishment... You'll see the punishment they get.
And that's for being communists ... for being subver-
sives! And if you get mixed up with communists and
subversives, you'll get the same treatment... Their faces
were monstrously disfigured, unrecognizable.


<!-- page-2 (book p.149) -->

My mother went closer to the lorry [cart] to see if she could recognize her son. Each of
the tortured had different wounds on the face. I mean, their faces all looked different.
But my mother recognized her son, my little brother, among them... My brother was very
badly tortured, he could hardly stand up. All the tortured had no nails and they had cut
off part of the soles of their feet...
Anyway, they lined up the tortured and poured petrol on them; and then the soldiers set
fire to each one of them. Many of them begged for mercy. They looked half dead when they
were lined up there, but when the bodies began to burn they began to plead for mercy.
Some of them screamed, many of them leapt but uttered no sound.!
Thus reads the sickening account of the death of Petrocinio Menchu Tum, Rigoberta
Menchu's brother, as Menchu recounted in her autobiography I, Rigoberta Menchu: An Indian
Woman in Guatemala. Menchu's compelling narrative won her the 1992 Nobel Peace Prize
and made her a hero on college campuses, where professors used her story to create sympathy
for the Marxist guerrillas fighting the US-backed Guatemalan government.
When doctoral student David Stoll went to Guatemala to verify Menchus story, how-
ever, he found much of it to be embellished far beyond what the facts would support. No
villager had any memory of the Guatemalan army carrying out such a slaughter as Menchu
described.' Menchu later admitted that she had not witnessed such an act. Stoll found many
other inaccuracies and untruths, the most serious of which was Menchus description of how
the Guatemalan government's repressive actions led to support of the Marxist guerrillas. Local
villagers told Stoll the guerrillas were not viewed as liberators; the people were terrified of them.
No one disputes the brutality of the Guatemalan government or its killing of Menchus
family members. But as Kevin J. Kelley commented, "U.S. leftists who give his [Stoll's] argu-
ments a full hearing—and who have not been deafened by their own dogma—will find Stoll's
analysis difficult to dismiss."
The response from university professors was at once unexpected and utterly predictable.
College instructors ordinarily insist on detailed documentation of student papers, and they
exact severe penalties for falsehood. But in this case, professors who assigned Menchus
book to their students seemed indifferent or even defensive. Professor Marjorie Agosin of
Wellesley College stated bluntly, "Whether her book is true or not, I don't care. We should
teach our students about the brutality of the Guatemalan military and the U.S. financing of
it?* Timothy Brook, a Stanford history professor, said, "The best teaching devices are those
which are gently flawed. The ambiguities and nuances
Postmodernism: a skeptical
worldview, founded as a
reaction to modernism,
that is suspicious of
metanarratives and teaches
that ultimate reality is
inaccessible, knowledge
is a social construct, and
truth claims are political
power plays.
are great teaching tools"s
Beyond the question of whether Menchu's claims
have merit lies an enormous question: Is the basis for
truth itself being challenged? Are we to the point where
something is seen as true not if it is factually correct but
if it communicates powerfully about things someone
believes?
Welcome to Postmodernism. Where other world-
views try to orient themselves to what actually exists,
Postmodernism plays by different rules. Postmodern
philosopher Richard Rorty said, "We ... [should] give
up the correspondence theory of truth, and start treating moral and scientific beliefs as tools
for achieving greater human happiness, rather than a representations of the intrinsic nature
Christians have two contradictory impulses when confronting Postmodernism. Some
dismiss it as a ridiculous denial of what is obviously true. Others are strangely attracted to
it: If truth is just a collection of artifacts giving the impression of truth, then who cares what
others say about what we believe? If it seems true to us, then it is true regardless of how valid
other people's criticisms might seem.
Myron B. Penner urges Christians not to dismiss the West's cultural and philosophical
infatuation with Postmodernism: "Christians must come to terms with and work through
the postmodern turn and its implications for faith, not ignore or retreat from it," he says? At
the same time, Penner warns those Christians flirting with Postmodernism to be careful not
to get caught up in it to the point where words become emptied of all truth.
Let's take both Penner's challenge and his warning seriously by examining Postmod-
ernism, peering into the history of its development, grasping its central arguments, dis-
cerning whether it is, in fact, a worldview, and discussing what it says about general and
special revelation.
2. WHAT IS POSTMODERNISM?
Postmodernism means "after modernism." But what,
then, is modernism? Modernism is the common name
given to the period of time from the 1700s through the
1900s in which assumptions about Christianity in the
West-belief in the supernatural, a trust in biblical rev-
elation, and the authority of the church-gave way to
skepticism about religion, an embrace of scientific in-
vestigation and technological progress, a trust in human
reason, and empiricism (the idea that we can only know
what our senses can perceive). Postmodernism is suspi-
cious of science and technology's ability, and religions
ability for that matter, to satisfactorily answer life's ul-
timate questions.
Modernism: A broad
term used to describe a
range of arts, attitudes,
philosophies, and cultural
moods that emerged
following the eighteenth-
century Enlightenment. It
is characterized by a strong
belief in rationalism,
empiricism, science, and
technological progress,
as well as skepticism
toward the supernatural,
special revelation, and the
authority of religion.
In the end, Postmodernism is a worldview that
denies all worldviews. Not only does Postmodernism
strongly critique the Secularist idea that science is the
most comprehensive way of knowing about the world; it
also critiques Christianity, New Spirituality, Islam, and
Marxism. The problem, according to Postmodernism,
The problem, according
to Postmodernism, is
each worldview's claim
to offer unbiased truth
about the world.
is each worldview's claim to offer unbiased truth about
a world. Since biased people always communicate
worldviews, they say, they are incapable of telling the truth in a way that corresponds t
none can be found.
the world as it actually is. Rather, they eople into looking for universal truths whet


<!-- page-3 -->

Theologian Kevin Vanhoozer points out that C. S. Lewis foresaw the shift toward Post-
modernist thinking. Lewiss term was bulverism, after its imaginary inventor Ezekiel Bulver.
Vanhoozer explains:
Lewis imagines the moment that bulverism was born, when five-year-old Ezekiel
heard his mother say to his father, "Oh, you say that because you are a man." Bulver
intuitively grasped the stunning implication: arguments need not be refuted, only
situated. One rebuts a thought simply by calling attention to the genealogy or lo-
cation of its thinker?
Having foreseen this way of forming arguments, probably nothing of what we see in
Postmodernism today would surprise Lewis.
When Postmodernists say truth is "situated" or "embedded," they mean that it is im-
possible to see any issue objectively because we are limited by our experiences in the world.
As James K. A. Smith puts it, "All of our experience is always already an interpretation." A
charitable understanding of this claim, according to R. Scott Smith, is to say "that we have
the ability to compare our concepts with things as they truly are ... and adjust our concepts
as needed to better fit with reality." If you have a general concept of a sports car, by learning
more about such cars, you can fine-tune your concept to the point where you can tell the
difference, say, between a Ferrari and a Porsche. But Postmodernists usually take it one
step further: our concepts themselves are not objective because our very thoughts about
them are affected by thinking them. Some even go so far as to deny that we ever have any
direct access to reality at all—that we are only commenting on our comments and thinking
about our thinking.
Postmodernism is difficult to grasp, but you can understand its basics by contemplating
what Vanhoozer says are the seven assumptions on which Postmodernism rests (paraphrased
here:
1. Postmodernists reject the idea that universal truth can be known; all people can know
is whether their individual experiences are true for them."
2. Postmodernists reject "reason" that applies everywhere at all times; reasonableness
rests on whatever narratives, traditions, institutions, and practices various groups
find reasonable.
3. Postmodernists reject that we can be objective in our knowledge-we are all situated
in our experiences.
4. Postmodernists reject modernist narratives that try to explain everything in the worla
and claim univerally valid, neutral, objective knowledge; the world is too fragmented
and complex to say that any one worldview explains everything.
5. Postmodernists reject the idea of "God," or at least our ability to gain a God's-eye view
of the world; we have to draw meaning out of the world for ourselves.
6. Postmodernists reject the idea that we can design institutions in society that would
make objective decisions based on reason; knowledge about the social order is con-
structed through the language we use to describe reality to ourselves and is biased by
its very nature.!
7. Postmodernists reject the notion that any person can be "neutral"; our cultures, lan-
guages, histories, and genders all color how we see the world.
In the end, due to our situatedness, Postmodernism says no one can have unmediated,
direct, or immediate access to reality. You don't see that Ferrari as it actually is— you are
only seeing what you interpret of its existence. If you say, "Wow, that's a cool car, all you're
doing is talking about your idea of cool. If you say, "Wow, that's a Ferrari F12 Berlinetta"
you're not so much identifying the car's essence as placing it in a mental category distinct
from all other kinds of cars, and such categories are mainly a commentary on what you
think, not what actually exists. Postmodernism has no use for the idea that anything has
an identifiable "essence." We just see what we see.!3
If Postmodernism sounds complicated to you, you're not alone. As we examine previously
held ideas about truth, identity, and knowledge, we may be able to see why some people find
it so compelling at this point in time.
For most of Western history, people not only assumed truth exists but that those disci-
plined enough to think well could find it. The postmodern turn, as Myron Penner describes
it, says truth is not "out there" waiting to be discovered. Rather, truth is "socially constructed"
through our interactions with one another, as filtered through our gender identity, where we
grow up, and our life experiences. We don't so much find truth as construct it. Truth (with a
capital T) about reality (the Truth) is replaced by our own collective "truths."
There's more. If truth can't be known because we have no way to think objectively about
it, then attempts to guide people to truth do not actually help us; instead, they oppress us.
Postmodern author Walter Truett Anderson even hesitates to use words like abnormal and
deviant in any definitive way because, as he says, "those categorizations are under fire now,
the boundary between normal and abnormal is as questionable now as are all the other
boundaries that once defined social reality."
How did we come to the place where we deny capital T Truth and boundaries between
truth and lies, good and evil? To answer this question, we need to understand a little of Post-
modernism's history.
3. THE HISTORY OF POSTMODERNISM
Gorgias taught rhetoric in ancient Greece, making a living by teaching people to be
persuasive on behalf of whatever cause they deemed important. What they used persuasion
for wasn't important to Gorgias; effectiveness, not truth, was his aim. Gorgias explained his
approach in a book called On Nature or the Non-Existent. While we no longer have the original
Text, we know the core argument of Gorgias's book went as follows:
Nothing exists.
Even if something exists, nothing can be known about it.
Even if something can be known about it, knowledge about it can't be communi-
cated to others.
Even if it can be communicated, it cannot be understood.


<!-- page-4 (book p.153) -->

If Gorgias was right, then both philosophy and communication were pointless. As you
can imagine, he was accused of being a nihilist, someone who believes in nothing.
But Gorgias did not hold to nihilism. He wasn't
saying that the rock you stubbed your toe on didn't ac-
Nihilism: the view that the
world and human existence
are without meaning,
purpose, comprehensible
truth, or essential value.
tually exist. Nor was he saying you couldn't have known
it existed, or that communicating to someone about it
was impossible. Rather, he was pointing out the confu-
sion between what exists and our thoughts about what
exists. People only know and communicate about things
because they themselves think. So when they tell others
what they are thinking, are they communicating what
exists or what they are thinking about what exists?
Sophism: a pre-Socratic
school of philosophy that
taught the art of rhetoric
and held skeptical views
of truth, knowledge, and
morality; a derogatory
term used to describe
a specious argument
intended to manipulate,
trick, or deceive.
The uncertain boundary between thought and ex-
istence enabled Gorgias to justify teaching people to
present themselves as virtuous even if they were not.
After all, if our thoughts about virtue don't describe
anything real, why should virtuous people have a cor-
ner on the virtue market? Historians call Gorgias and
his like-minded teachers sophists. Sophia is the Greek
word for "wisdom." Sophists thought of themselves as
wise. Today sophism carries a negative connotation; it's
the root word for sophistry, by which we mean tricky,
manipulative argument.
We know about the sophists mostly because of Plato, who wrote a series of dialogues, or
conversations, in which his mentor Socrates encountered foolish people and disabused them
of their silly philosophies. The Sophists always came out looking bad in Plato's dialogues, and
his critique of them —put in the mouth of Socrates-made sense to most people for millennia.
Truth was objective and knowable. Anyone who disagreed, who said truth was subjective and
dependent on the perspective of the person looking at it, was in the minority.
In the 1800s German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche helped resurrect sophism. He
considered sophism superior to other views about knowledge and communication. Accord-
ing to Nietzsche, "Everv advance in epistemological and moral knowledge has reinstated
the Sophists"14
Nietzsche rejected the idea that objective truth can be known, which probably shocked
those who knew him in his younger years. His nickname as a boy, after all, had been "the
little pastor, since, according to his sister, Elisabeth, "he could recite biblical texts and hymns
with such feeling that he almost made one cry? Nietzsche himself wrote of his commitment
to Christ: "T have firmly resolved within me to dedicate myself forever to His service. May
the dear Lord give me strength and power to carry out my intentions and protect me on my
life's way. 15
But by age eighteen, Nietzsche began changing his mind. He wrote, "If we could ex-
amine Christian doctrine and Church history with a free, unconstrained eye, we would
be compelled to arrive at many conclusions which contradict generally accepted ideas."16
Before long, under the influence of the writings of Ludwig Feuerbach, Nietzsche began
seeing "gods" as human creations. They were nothing more than a projection of our ideas
of what is perfect. In his biography of Nietzsche, Julian Young summarized Feuerbach's-
and Nietzsche's-view: "Rightly understood Jesus is not a gateway to another life but a role
model for this one."!7
Many people today sympathize with Nietzsches shift in thinking: If Jesus was a good
teacher but not God, we can embrace the parts of the Bible we like without having to explain
or defend the uncomfortable parts. After all, if our claims about reality don't need to be
true-just important to us-then a rejection of Christianity as capital T Truth is the nicest,
most enlightened thing we can do!
If Nietzsche's thinking seems radical today, imagine how it appeared to the people of
his time. By the time of Nietzsche's writing, modernism was well underway. People believed
science would ultimately explain everything. Philosophers thought human reason could be
developed to the point where we would no longer need to rely on special revelation to un-
derstand the world. But Nietzsche saw past this pretention to a time when anything we relied
on for certainty would break down. Are we brave enough to face such a world?
Eventually, Nietzsche abandoned any notion of Christianity's value, though he knew
chaos would result if people tried to live according to what he said. The most famous passage
of his writing, in which a madman confronts his fellow citizens about God's death, is both
honest and tragic:
Whither is God? I will tell you. We have killed him—you and I. All of us are his mur-
derers. But how did we do this? How could we drink up the sea? Who gave us the
sponge to wipe away the entire horizon? What were we doing when we unchained
this earth from its sun? Whither is it moving now? Whither are we moving? Away
from all suns? Are we not plunging continually? Backward, sideward, forward, in all
directions? Is there still any up or down? Are we not straying, as through an infinite
nothing? Do we not feel the breath of empty space? Has it not become colder? Is not
night continually closing in on us? Do we not need to light lanterns in the morning?
Do we hear nothing as yet of the noise of the gravediggers who are burying God? Do
we smell nothing as yet of the divine decomposition? Gods, too, decompose. God is
dead. God remains dead. And we have killed him.1s
By this statement Nietzsche did not mean to imply God was once alive and had died. He
was assuming belief in God to be unnecessary-and that only our belief in God kept him
alive-while encouraging the reader to get busy dealing with the implications of this fact.
If it had not been for people's growing cynicism about the ability of science and technolog
to solve all of our problems. Nietzsches ideas might not have emerged as so important. As it
was, his thinking profoundly influenced an entire generation of philosophers, among them
Michel Foucault, a famous, influential, if personally troubled twentieth-century intellect.
In 1948, as a young university student, Foucault attempted suicide. The resident doctor at
the elite Parisian university where he was studying, L'Ecole normale supérieure, concluded
that Foucault was racked with guilt over his frequent nocturnal visits to the illegal gay bars
of the French capital Foucault's father a strict disciplinarian who had previously sent his
son to the most regimented Catholic school he could find, arranged for him to be admitted


<!-- page-5 (book p.155) -->

to a psychiatric hospital for evaluation. After his release, Foucault remained obsessed with
death. He often joked about hanging himself and made further attempts to end his own life.
Foucault's youthful experiences with homosexuality, attempted suicide, and mental imbal-
ance proved decisive for his intellectual development. His philosophy became a way of coping
with his own rejection of absolute truth as well as a crusade to liberate humanity from labeling,
marginalization, and suppression. Before his death from AIDS, which he contracted through
anonymous gay sex, Foucault turned the world of philosophy upside down with books like
Madness and Civilization (1961), The Birth of the Clinic (1963), Discipline and Punish (1975),
and The History of Sexuality (in three volumes, 1976-1984).
Apparently, Foucault saw himself as trapped in a cycle of the death of societal truths, a
cycle first revealed by his hero, Nietzsche:
Nietzsche indicated the turning-point from a long way off; it is not so much the absence
or the death of God that is affirmed as the end of Man....It becomes apparent, then,
that the death of God and the last man are engaged in a contest with more than one
round: is it not the last man who announces that he has killed God, thus situating his
language, his thought, his laughter in the space of that already dead God, yet positing
himself also as he who has killed God and whose existence includes the freedom and the
decision of that murder? Thus, the last man is at the same time older and yet younger
than the death of God; since he has killed God, it is he himself who must answer for
his own finitude; but since it is in the death of God that he speaks, thinks, and exists,
his murder itself is doomed to die; new gods, the same gods, are already swelling the
future Ocean; Man will disappear.20
Foucault placed his finger on the carotid artery of modernism and found it to be as cold
a corpse as Nietzsche's God. God was dead. Modernism attempted to enthrone humanity
in his place, but everything important was slaughtered
Modernism attempted
to enthrone humanity in
his place, but everything
important was slaughtered
along with God. No one
was left to be crowned.
along with God. No one was left to be crowned.
This sounds morbid, to be sure, and it is admittedly
difficult to condense two thousand years of philosophical
history into a few sentences. But the key takeaway re-
mains: philosophy today operates on what Paul Ricoeur
called a "hermeneutic of suspicion" —our interpretation
of everything in society should express doubt about all
truth claims." Postmodernism cannot allow for thoughts
and things to have any firmly knowable meaning aside from our interpretation. As Daniel
Dennett understands, "If things had real, intrinsic essences, they could have real, intrinsic
meanings." And that is simply unacceptable.?
4. WHAT ARE THE KEY CHARACTERISTICS OF POSTMODERNISM?
Most worldviews state and defend their basic assumptions about reality. Postmodernists,
though, try to position their thinking as a way to see through other worldviews, not as a
worldview itself. Postmodernism dismisses the truth claims of other worldviews by focusing on
how language is used to create and maintain the structures of society. Some Postmodernists-
such as Jacques Derrida - focus on "deconstructing language to diminish its ability to persuade
us that dominant truth claims actually represent truth.
Others-Ludwig Wittgenstein and J. L. Austin, for
example-analyze "speech acts" to show that there is no
necessary relationship between a description and what
is being described. In other words, a thought about a
Ferrari and the Ferrari itself are related only incidentally.
Postmodernism dismisses
the truth claims of other
worldviews by focusing
on how language is used
to create and maintain the
structures of society.
Thoughts are thoughts and things are things. Other
philosophers, like Edmund Husserl, have responded to
this way of thinking by pointing out that thoughts are not just random; they are about things,
and they are intended to be about things. The thought has certain properties, and so does the
biect of the thought. These properties are part of the nature of the thought and of the thing
How Husserl communicates this sounds complicated, but it is important:
That a representation refers to a certain object in a certain manner, is not due to its
acting on some external, independent object, "directing" itself to it in some literal sense,
or doing something to it or with it, as a hand writes with a pen. It is due to nothing that
stays outside of the presentation, but to its own inner
peculiarity alone.... A given presentation presents this
object in this manner in view of its peculiarly differ-
entiated presentational characteristics.23
In other words, objects and thoughts have qualities
that present themselves consistently no matter who is
thinking about them. If someone says A and you hear B,
If someone says A and
you hear B, it is not
because A has no essence
but because you either
aren't paying attention or
are being ornery.
it is not because A has no essence but because you either
aren't paying attention or are being ornery.
We recognize that this is an introductory text and that we're already wading in some
pretty deep waters, so let's look at each piece of Postmodernist philosophy one at a time.
Language. Not everyone thinks in the same way or about the same things, but everyone
uses Language. Edward Sapir wrote in 1921,
There is no more striking general fact about language than its universality. One may
argue as to whether a particular tribe engages in activities that are worthy of the
name of religion or of art, but we know of no people that is not possessed of a fully
developed language. The lowliest South African Bushman speaks in the forms of a
rich symbolic svstem that is in essence perfectly comparable to the speech of the
cultivated Frenchman.24
To the Postmodernist. lanouge is the hest starting noint then, for trving to describe
human experience. No matter where vou live. language shapes the way you think. And those
who have a greater command of the language are able to think more accurately. For example,
a computer-programming expert with a larger vocabulary of technical words is able to think
more precisely about computer programming than a novice.
But, according to Sapir, language does more than just shape our thoughts. It actually shapes
our approach to life:


<!-- page-6 -->

Peculiar modes of pronunciation, characteristic turns of phrase, slangy forms of speech,
occupational terminologies of all sorts-these are so many symbols of the manifold ways
in which society arranges itself and are of crucial importance for the understanding
of the development of individual and social attitudes.25
Given the central role of language, one group of
philosophers in the early 1900s argued that we should
Structuralism:
an intellectual movement
that believes human
knowledge is not based on
an accurate understanding
of reality but is the
product of linguistically
constructed forms or
grammars that societies
have developed over time.
build our philosophy around language and relationships
rather than around the nature of physical existence itself.
This movement was called structuralism. Instead of
focusing on scientific facts, structuralists look at how
the way we use language causes us to view facts differ-
ently based on our experiences. So, for example, people
who live in a rain-forest climate probably have words
allowing them to more clearly describe different kinds
of rain, whereas Eskimos presumably have more terms
to describe snow. Structuralists aren't as interested in
learning about rain or snow as they are interested in
learning about how we talk about rain and snow based
Poststructuralism:
an intellectual movement
that agrees with
structuralism-it is
more important to study
language and relationship
because it is impossible
to have knowledge of
objective reality-but
progresses further by
contending that human
communication is not
really about things
but about the views
and motivations of
those involved in the
conversation.
on our experiences.
Poststructuralism. While structuralism was the
starting point for many Postmodernists, Postmod-
ernism itself is generally regarded as poststructural-
ist because Postmodernists see their thoughts about
language as moving beyond how it functions to its
use. Postmodernists think we cannot know the world
directly. We only know it as we interpret it. Since our
language structures our relationships, our talk about
the objects in the world isn't really about those objects
at all; it's really about ourselves. So, to use the previous
example, when the rain-forest natives talk about rain
and Eskimos talk about snow, they aren't really talking
about rain or snow but about themselves-what they
think is important about the weather and why. When
your friend says, "There is a chair, he is not so much
commenting on the chairness of the chair as he is mak-
ing a statement about his own understanding of objects like chairs, about how he himself
is not the chair, and how he thinks you should view the world similarly. As the German
philosopher Martin Heidegger famously said,
The unitary fourfold sky and earth, mortals and divinities, which is stayed in the
thinging of things, we call-the world. In the naming, the things named are called
into their thinging. Thinging, they unfold world, in which things abide, and so are the
abiding ones. By thinging, things carry out world.26
What... does. this ... mean? Is Heidegger suggesting that things don't actually exist
until we name them? No. He is implying that things only take on meaning as they become
subject to our understanding through communication. It's a similar point to the one the sophist
Gorgias made centuries ago.
We will critique this view later in this chapter and throughout this book, but you can
imagine how exciting this way of thinking seemed to philosophers. It gave birth to whole
new sets of questions crying out to be answered: How exactly do we use communication
to structure our world? How do different communities and language groups understand
the world differently? How is it possible that people's way of thinking in one culture makes
complete sense to them but to no one else? And perhaps the trickiest question of all: How
do people use language to get others to do what they want?
George Orwell's concern about the use and misuse of language to create dictatorial power
led him to write 1984, in which he chillingly described Newspeak, a way of changing lan-
guage to limit the range of expression, and thus to limit
thought. In one scene, Syme is lecturing her coworker
Winston, the main character, about Newspeak's virtues:
You haven't a real appreciation of Newspeak, Win-
ston. Even when you write it you're still thinking
in Oldspeak. I've read some of those pieces that
you write in the Times occasionally. They're good
enough, but they're translations. In your heart youd
prefer to stick to Oldspeak, with all its vagueness and
its useless shades of meaning. You don't grasp the
beauty of the destruction of words. Do you know that
George Orwell's concern
about the use and misuse
of language to create
dictatorial power led him
to write 1984, in which
he chillingly described
Newspeak, a way of
changing language to limit
the range of expression,
and thus to limit thought.
Newspeak is the only language in the world whose
vocabulary gets smaller every year??? ... Don't you
see that the whole aim of Newspeak is to narrow the range of thought? In the end
we shall make thought-crime literally impossible, because there will be no words
in which to express it.28
If language structures how people think about things, then by eliminating certain words
from usage and promoting other words, we can change the way people think. Now that's
power! And this power is precisely what the poststructuralists were reacting against.
Poststructuralists have moved beyond structuralism (ie., the consideration of how lan-
suage structures our interactions), agreeing instead that language is primarily a tool of op-
pression, which the powerful use to impose ideas on
everyone else.
Deconstruction: a method
Deconstruction. In the 1950s the world was still
of literary analysis that
reling from the ways brutal dictators manipulated
questions the ability of
language to create "cultural hegemony" (i.e., the way
language to represent
the ruling class dominates society by shaping its values
reality adequately and
and beliefs), commit violence, and exclude the views
seeks to discern and expose
of those with whom they disagreed. Philosophers like
the purported underlying
Michel Foucault, Jean Baudrillard, Jacques Derrida, and
ideologies of a text.


<!-- page-7 (book p.159) -->

Tean-Francois Lyotard began looking for clues as to how dictators pulled it off, and they found
themselves dismayed at the way modernism — supposedly rational and objective-had become
an element of control in the hands of those with ill intent.
As we have already mentioned briefly, Jacques Derrida, in particular, tried to show through
his writings how texts of all kinds could be "deconstructed" to reveal their underlying as-
sumptions and ideologies. Literature professors across the world had fun showing students
how to ferret out a text's hidden or multiple meanings (polysemy). In the end, the reader's
interpretation of the text became more important than the meaning the author intended to
communicate, since, strictly speaking, there was no meaning in the text itself.? There couldn't
be- thoughts and things did not have "essences" that were consistently identifiable. Your
experience with something in the world cannot be generalized so that others experiences of
it can be said to be the same.
In 1968, Roland Barthes wrote a short essay titled "The Death of the Author" In this essay
he argued that the origin of the text is not the important thing; rather, it is the destination-
the reader. By allowing the reader to invent new meanings, the text is freed from the tyranny
of the author's single intended meaning. For example, there is no reason to assume "that a
Shakespearean play means exactly the same thing today as it did when first performed."30
Each author (or artist) is the product of her own cultural setting and uses language to describe
her interpretation of her own situation. Our situation is different, so our interpretation will
obviously be different, as will the language we use to describe it. Thus, postmodern literary
criticism claims that words cannot be known to accurately describe objects in the world.
Words are about words, not about things. No matter how a writer constructs a sentence,
it can never tell us about the real world, only about the world as the reader understands it.
This concept is summed up in the phrase "That's just your interpretation."
Subjectivity. One of the ways Postmodernists think language functions as a tool of power
in the modern world is by establishing metanarratives. A metanarrative is a unifying story
about the world that aspires to explain everything as if from a God's-eye viewpoint. Metanar-
ratives become so powerful that people who embrace them literally cannot imagine the world
being any other way. Understanding the persuasive power of metanarratives, Postmodernists
say, is the key to uncovering their secret power and freeing ourselves from their grip.
It's easy to imagine how this way of thinking leads to
Metanarrative: a single
overarching interpretation,
or grand story, of reality.
a denial of universal, objective truth. Let's say you lived in
a country where every time people gained freedom, they
used it to do horrible things to others. If someone arrived
on your shores proclaiming, "Freedom is good. Support
more freedom!" you would probably be suspicious: "This
person wants freedom because he intends to do horrible things to us? If you then traveled to
another country where freedom was cherished as the basis of a good society, you'd probably
be conficted. How would you resolve this conflict? Most people resolve it not by recognizing
that freedom is a good thing when properly understood but by viewing freedom as neither
good nor bad except when the situation makes it so. This is called subjectivity.
Subjectivity is what Jean-Francois Lyotard had in mind in his famous statement about
"incredulity towards metanarrative"' To Lyotard, broad explanations are arrogant; they
deserve suspicion because peoples experiences are so varied, and peoples experiences, not
general statements about the world, are what we should be paying attention to.
Even as you read this book, Postmodernists would say, you are not really learning to
understand the world as it actually is: vou are merging the concepts you're learning about
into both vour experiences and your cultures influence on you. We cannot know whatever
"real world" is out there, they say. Strictly speaking, there are seven billion interpretations
of the world because each person on the planet sees the
world based on his or her own subjective experiences and
culture. Occasionally you'll hear Postmodernists use the
term anti-realism to describe this suspicious approach to
the so-called real world. 32
Anti-realism:
the denial of the existence
or accessibility of an
objective reality.
So, for Postmodernists, capital T Truth cannot be
known directly. There are only "truths" (small t) that are
particular to a society or group of people and are limited to individual perception. Written
or verbal statements can reflect only a particular localized culture or individual point of view.
A catchphrase we often hear is "That may be true for you but not for me."
Yet by making the universal statement that there are no metanarratives, haven't Postmod-
ernists actually created a metanarrative of their own? The story that all universal truths are
false, that there are only local stories told by various cultures, is itself a story of the world. In
some ways, Postmodernism is the anti-worldview worldview. But can we understand it well
enough to predict how Postmodernists will view any given situation or academic discipline?
This is the question we will tackle next.
5. THE WORLDVIEW OF POSTMODERNISM
We define a worldview as "a pattern of ideas, beliefs, convictions, and habits" A
wordview shapes what we pay attention to and what we ignore. What we believe and what
we pay attention to can cause us to interpret the world in a certain way. Postmodernism
claims to point out these things; it is an analyzer of these interpretations, not a generator
making truth claims of its own. Is it even fair to call Postmodernism a worldview? Honest
Postmodernists say yes because they realize that the tools used to "interpret the interpreta-
tions" of others come from someplace-they too are situated in any given Postmodernist's
ideas, beliefs, convictions, and habits. Postmodernist author Walter Truett Anderson is one
Who acknowledges this and says that Postmodernism is one of four worldviews operating
in the West today 34
Some worldviews begin with claims about reality-reality is God and his creation, or
reality is consciousness, or reality is the primacy of the individual self. Other worldviews form
as critical stances, reactions to other dominant worldviews. Marxism, for example, formed
as a reaction against a biblical view of God. the duty of man, and stewardship of property. In
this way Postmodernism is like Marxism. In the beginning Postmodernism was primarily
a critical stance, a rejection of dominant worldviews. But, like Marxism, Postmodernism
couldn't sustain itself as a mere reaction: it had to build something and answer importan
questions. The principles of Postmodernism, then, have been applied to everything from
literature to political science to architecture and music.


<!-- page-8 (book p.161) -->

Over time, as Daniel A. Farber and Suzanna Sherry argue, Postmodernism has become
a robust way of thinking about everything:
[Postmodernism] is a powerful and coherent mindset. It provides a philosophical
outlook (social constructionism), a legal reform program, and a set of governing
metaphors, all in one convenient package. This package has the added benefit of res-
onating with ideas that are popular in other parts of the academy. If one has doubts
about the social construction of truth or merit, one can rest assured that the matter
has been settled in the impenetrable prose of some esteemed French philosophers 35
So Postmodernism is more than a critical stance, and later in this book, we will discern
identifiable postmodern patterns of thought in each of the ten disciplines we'll consider:
theology, philosophy, ethics, biology, psychology, sociology, law, politics, economics, and
history. These patterns are clear enough that we can predict with a fair degree of accuracy
what Postmodernists will say or do about new things that come along. Let's look at Postmod-
ernism's patterns next, starting with its understanding of general revelation.
6. GENERAL REVELATION: POSTMODERNISM AND THE WORLD THAT
ACTUALLY EXISTS
Christian author Nancy Pearcey relates the following firsthand experience:
I witnessed a fascinating altercation at a conference at Boston University on science and
postmodernism several years ago. Postmodernist philosophers led off by arguing that
"there are no metanarratives, meaning no overarching, universal truths. Responding on
behalf of the scientists was Nobel Prize-winning physicist Steven Weinberg, who replied:
But of course there are metanarratives. After all, there's evolution —a vast metanarrative
from the Big Bang to the origin of the solar system to the origin of human life. And
since evolution is true, that proves there is at least one metanarrative.... To which the
postmodernist philosophers responded, ever so politely: That's just your metanarrative.
Evolution is merely a social construct, they said, like every other intellectual schema—a
creation of the human mind. 36
Some evolutionists agree with this. Daniel Dennett, for example, says that if naturalism
(only nature exists) is true, then things do not have their own "essence" —any idea of essence
is just what we make up to describe the world to ourselves. To Dennett, we cannot directly
access the world as it actually is, so all we can hope for is to interpret what we observe as
accurately as possible.37
It sounds bizarre to say that we can't know or even observe actual truth. Aren't there
some truths we can all agree on, such as one plus one equals two, or stepping on the high-
way in front of a tractor trailer moving at sixty-five miles per hour will get vou flattened?
If Postmodernists don't see it this way, can we actually sav that they have a view of general
revelation, of things known to be true regardless of culture or life experiences?
Some Postmodernists see science as a form of coping rather than a reliable means of
gaining knowledge. For evample. Paul Feverabend. former philosophy professor at the Uni-
versity of California, Berkeley, wrote,
To those who look at the rich material provided by history, and who are not intent on
impoverishing it in order to please their lower instincts- their craving for intellectual
security in the form of clarity, precision, "objectivity, [or) "truth" it will become clear
that there is only one principle that can be defended under all circumstances and in
all stages of human development. It is the principle: anything goes.38
Here is Feyerabend's view of science in a nutshell: In the history of science, many the-
ories have arisen, been accepted as established, promoted as the truth, and then eventually
discarded. When a scientist promotes scientific data
in support of a theory, that bit of data is anything but
neutral because the scientist is biased. He can't see it
any other way, even if his perception of the data fails to
correspond to the characteristics of the data itself. If he's
a powerful person and refuses to acknowledge that he
is wrong, then it becomes a power play, and his agenda
Some Postmodernists
see science as a form
of coping rather than
a reliable means
of gaining knowledge.
is no longer the pursuit of truth but gathering support
for his biased views. In all fields of science, questions remain open as scientific theories are
regularly tweaked. And to top it off, the scientific establishment is very much politicized 39
Scientists are just as messed up as the rest of us.
Doubts about the objectivity and neutrality of science arose in the mid-1900s from Michael
Polanyis Personal Knowledge° and Thomas Kuhn's The Structure of Scientific Revolutions.4)
Kuhn, for example, pointed out that science is not merely a progressive and incremental dis-
cipline for the study and recording of facts. So-called facts can be understood and interpreted
in a variety of ways depending on the worldview assumptions of the scientist.
In addition. Kuhn asserted that scientific theories, or paradigms. do not often fall out of
favor because they are proven wrong, Rather, older theories tend to die out along with their
proponents, while new and creative theories attract the attention of younger scientists who,
in turn, promote their theories over the older ones 43 A current scientific theory is just that:
a current theory, which will be replaced by another current theory in the future. This is why
science cannot tell us what is real, only what scientists believe to be the case at a particular
time in history. Everyone, including the scientist, is locked into their particular cultures and
languages and thus cannot claim to have an objective picture of the world.
Even mathematics is not immune from postmodern analysis. Doubts about the objectiv-
ity of math were brought to light with Douglas R. Hofstadter's Pulitzer Prize-winning book
Gödel, Escher, Bach: An Eternal Golden Braid, published in 1979.4 The author of another text,
Ethnomathematics: A Multicultural View of Mathematical Ideas, Marcia Ascher, asserted that
much of mathematics education depends upon assumptions of Western culture. For example,
she wrote that no other culture need share the categories triangle, right triangle, hypotenuse
of a right triangle." Ascher wondered, "Is a square something that has external reality or is it
something only in our minds?"s
In our chapters on Christianitv and Secularism. we critiqued science for its unwarranted
claim of providing certain answers to life's questions. But the Postmodernist critique goes
far beyond this, claiming that because our observations are culturally and linguistically
situated, the knowledge we gain from science does not ultimately help us understand the


<!-- page-9 (book p.163) -->

world as it actually is. Whereas Christians might point
Whereas Christians
might point to the sin
nature to explain how
our careful attempts at
scientific knowledge can
go wrong, Postmodernists
don't think theories go
wrong because they're
flawed. They go wrong
because true theories are
impossible.
to the sin nature to explain how our careful attempts at
scientific knowledge can go wrong, Postmodernists don't
think theories go wrong because they're flawed. They go
wrong because true theories are impossible. Reality is
not accessible to us. When we try to access it, were just
interpreting it, and our efforts to nail down truth are
just interpretations of our interpretations.
Of course, though, no one can really live as if nothing
can be known, including Postmodernists. They quar-
rel with one another when they think their arguments
have been interpreted incorrectly. They still drive across
bridges constructed through principles of science in cars
engineered for safety and efficiency. If muggers attack them, they'll complain if the police
don't come to their rescue. At the end of the day, we might ask whether Postmodernism is
something we should really be paying attention to, or whether Postmodernists are just un-
grateful whiners who should be ignored. Knowing what you already know about Postmod-
ernism, though, you probably suspect that it isn't that simple. Postmodernists do believe they
have insight that enables them to approach life's ultimate questions. It is to these presumed
answers-Postmodernism's version of special revelation-that we will now turn.
7. SPECIAL REVELATION: POSTMODERNISM'S ANSWERS TO THE ULTIMATE
QUESTIONS
In our chapters on each of the six worldviews, we have focused on how proponents of
those worldviews answer life's ultimate questions. How do they know their answers are actually
true? General revelation says some things can be known because they present themselves to
us directly through observation. Postmodernists may say all ways of knowing are tainted, but
don't they still make actual claims about the world? On what basis do they make them? If they
make them from their particular standpoint but act as if they should be generally applied,
then they are being inconsistent. Anytime Postmodernists speak to the issue of government
debt or traditional marriage or the rightness of a particular military action, they are being
hypocritical in assuming that their particular viewpoints should affect our perceptions. Our
question should be (politely), "Why should we assume that your particular viewpoint has
any meaning for anyone else? If they answer that question, write down the answer: it is the
expression of what they believe to be an absolute truth.
1. On what sources of revelation does Postmodernism draw? Postmodernism is, in
many ways, the height of hypocrisy. If it were true, we could never know it to be true. its
sources of revelation are mostly whip-smart professors: Michel Foucault, Jacques Derrida,
Richard Rorty, and Martin Heidegger (philosophy), Jean- François Lyotard (philosophy
and sociology). Jean Baudrillard (sociology), Jacques Lacan (psychology), Stanley Fish
(literature and law), Ludwig Wittgenstein (language) and others Most of these men had
an extensive working knowledge of philosophv, literature, and even religion. But should
their ideas be trusted? If "all ideas about human reality are social constructions" as Walter
daim? Such a statement-which incidentally is a propositionally framed statement of
Truett Anderson claims, * then why would we, or even Anderson, believe Anderson's own
absolute knowledge-would make no sense to someone whose cultural background and
life experiences were different from Anderson's. But every one of these authors wrote and
published books and articles on the assumption that people would understand them. Why
would they do this? It contradicted everything they taught."
Jacques Derrida, at least, clearly understood the kind of world Postmodernism was
ushering in and declared his intention not to be among those who let their queasiness get
the better of them. Postmodernists, Derrida claimed, "turn their eyes away" when faced
with the prospect that ours is "the species of the nonspecies, in the formless, mute, infant,
and terrifying form of monstrosity 48 Social construction is like an onion— when you're
done peeling, there is nothing left: no truth that we can perceive, no enduring conception
of what it means to be human, no access to what is real. Postmodernists have trespassed
into territory Gorgias might have feared to tread and Nietzsche saw only as he wavered
back and forth across the boundary of what we now know to have been syphilis-induced
insanity. A world devoid of ultimate meaning or purpose does not make itself easily acces-
sible to a coherent worldview, and anyway there would be no point.49
2. What does Postmodernism say about humanity? In their book about postmodern
economics, David Ruccio and Jack Amariglio make a startling statement: there is "no singular
and unique 'I. "50 In other words, there is no self-iden-
tity and no permanent soul or mind. Postmodernists
refer to human beings not as persons but as subjects,
To Postmodernists there
bodies, or units. "Person" suggests the existence of a
is no human nature. There
singular and unique I who possesses a personality or
is only an ever-evolving,
human nature." To Postmodernists there is no human
highly sexual social
nature. There is only an ever-evolving, highly sexual
animal with multiple
social animal with multiple subjective interests crying
subjective interests crying
out for recognition and acceptance.2
out for recognition
So when Anderson says all ideas about human re-
and acceptance.
ality are social constructions, he's not just proclaiming
the social construction of thought. He's saying we are socially constructed. We don't exist as
persons; we don't have souls but are "a collage of social constructs? Mitchell Stephens builds
on this stunning implication: "It's not just that we each have different sides to our personality;
it's that we have no central personality in relation to which all our varied behaviors might be
seen as just 'sides! We are, in other words, not absolutely anything?
But there is more. Postmodern schologists are now asserting there is no one "self
but a multiplicity of "selves." Kenneth Gergen is a psychology professor at Swarthmore
College. His book The Saturated Self: Dilemmas of Identity in Contemporary Life is con-
sidered one of the best introductions to postmodern psychology. Gergen states, "In place
of an enduring core of deen and indelible character there is a chorus of invitations. Each
invitation 'to be' also casts doubt on the wisdom and authenticity of the others. Further,
the postmodern person senses the constructed character of all attempts at being-on the
part of both self and others."


<!-- page-10 (book p.165) -->

3. What does Postmodernism say is wrong with us? If "we" don't really exist, if we
have no soul or indeed, any identifiable self, why do we sense that there is something wrong
with us and with the world? What is the nature of that wrong? Richard Rorty, one of the
most well-known philosophers of the twentieth century, believed the problem is adherence
to metanarratives such as Christianity. For Rorty, there was "no room for obedience to a
nonhuman authority (i.e., God] In fact, creating the new conception of what it means to be
human was "a matter of forgetting about eternity""56
Postmodernists have difficulty living with the rejection of universal truths. The statement,
for example, "The train is coming!" may convey a multitude of interpretations to different
people-as good news perhaps, or bad news, or a metaphor. But we contend that if people fail
to get off the tracks, the result of their interpretation may prove fatal. Real life is not open to
infinite interpretations. There are, as even atheist philosopher Daniel Dennett acknowledges,
"brute facts" in the real world. There are essences. There are boundaries. There are categories
of meaning that exist independent of our ability to perceive them. At any particular moment
in time, either a train is coming down the tracks or not. This real-world fact is not a matter
of our personal interpretation. Regardless of the word games, Postmodernists have a hard
time escaping the demand that our ideas correspond to what actually exists.
4. What does Postmodernism say about how we should live? Richard Rorty advocated
abandoning the search for objective truth in favor of pragmatism, the idea that truth is not
"out there" to be discerned. Rather our experiences will enable us to generate a theory about
living, which we can use to understand our experiences.
Rather than a quest for truth, Rorty suggested that
Pragmatism: the belief
that propositions do not
mirror reality and should
therefore be treated
as tools and judged
only by their practical
consequences.
the pragmatist strive for "hermeneutic conversation."
Rorty invited his opponents to dialogue with him to
see if they could reach agreement, or at least a fruitful
disagreement. He said that the "hope of agreement is
never lost as long as the conversation lasts."58
For Rorty, this use of language and dialogue was
"edifying philosophy" a chance to create some type of
reality with the realization that we can never discover
true or objective reality outside the boundaries of language, culture, and locality. Since there
is no objective, universal Truth, Rorty suggested that perhaps we can reach some type of
agreeable truths (small t) in order to get along with others.
But does truth result from such a conversation? Not really. Rorty's insistence on give-
and-take and final agreement only sets the stage for another round of conversation where
give-and-take results in further agreement or disagreement. Truth is never the result of
continuing conversation, because the conversation will never be finished."
5. How are we to understand other worldviews based on Postmodernism? If Postmod-
ernism is accepted, the other worldviews we have considered must be discarded. Let's consider
for a moment how Postmodernists are likely to view each of these worldviews.
Christianity. In The Twilight of Atheism, Alister McGrath says, "The very idea of decon-
struction seems to suggest that the idea of God ought to be eliminated from Western culture
as a power play on the part of churches and others with vested interests in its survival? The
insistence on absolute biblical truth is what leads to violence and oppression. Presumably,
then, freedom from these absolutes would restore peace and balance. This is far off base. The
three "-isms" (communism, Nazism, and fascism) of the twentieth century responsible for
the slaughter of tens of millions were not exactly bastions of theism and Christianity 61 Ac
a matter of fact, all three were grounded in atheism, evolution, and socialism—three per-
spectives Postmodernists carry around in the backseat, though they may not turn to look at
them very often.
Of course, there are self-proclaimed Christian Postmodernists, such as James K. A.
Smith, Brian McLaren, Merold Westphal, Nancey Murphy, Stanley Hauerwas, and Alasdair
Macintyre, who reject the idea that deconstructionism entails the elimination of God. But
even these individuals seem to consider biblical authors, like all authors, to be situated in their
own cultures, experiences, and languages; what they wrote described their own subjective
experiences as much as objective or eternal truths about God and humanity. These Christian
Postmodernists would surely recoil at the way postmodern ideas about objective truth created
room for evil to flourish. But what do they have to say about our actual nature as humans? Are
we merely bundles of relations and not souls? There are enormous doctrinal implications to
this. For one, sin becomes redefined as the disruption of relationships. Our primary problem
is not being spiritually dead because of our sin against God but our incompetence in living
in relationship with others. If this is so, the solution to sin is therapeutic: what we need is
not to be rescued from the penalty of sin and the threat of eternal punishment but to follow
Jesus's moral example of how to live well with others.
Christian Postmodernism often begins with what some have called the "hermeneutics
of finitude," the notion that we are finite and limited in our humanness, so we must be hum-
ble or chastened in our claims to reality. That humans are fallen is certainly consistent with
biblical teaching. But does it follow that we cannot understand reality? If we take this view
too far, we might end up saying we cannot understand things Scripture clearly commands
us to understand, in which case we make an idol out
of our reluctance. This is not humility-it is stubborn
sinfulness.
Perhaps a better perspective is to say that we can
know reality truly, though not exhaustively. Like a jig-
saw puzzle, we can see the picture emerging even if all
Christian Postmodernism:
a hybrid worldview that
incorporates elements of
postmodern philosophy
and Christian theology.
of the pieces are not in place. Imagine someone who
is lost because he cannot match up what he sees in his
surroundings with the description of the area he sees on the map. We might conclude that
he is lost because his perspective is limited by his physical nature (he can't fly up to get a
bird's-eye view). But his lostness might also manifest in anger that leads to irrational thinking,
embarrassment that leads to self-justification, frustration that leads to a stubborn refusal to
stop and ask for directions. None of this, though, would mean that the proper route cannot
be known or even that there is no possibility of an accurate map.
Ironically, by claiming that we do not have access to reality as it is in itself but only as
we interpret it, we set our interpretations-what we think Scripture means-and what we


<!-- page-11 (book p.167) -->

experience of God over who God has actually revealed himself to be in his Word and in the
world. This is far from a humble thing. It can in fact be spiritually dangerous.
Islam. Islam comprises a metanarrative purporting to explain all of reality. Postmodern-
ism, while interested in how Islamic ideas developed and sustained themselves over time,
has nonetheless rejected Islam's claim to objectively describe reality as it actually exists. This
said, some Muslim philosophers have developed postmodern and anti-realist lines on the
assumption that ultimate reality cannot be reduced to a series of statements we can know to
be true or false. As more and more "facts" about Islam are called into question, such a line
of thinking may allow Muslim thinkers to continue to assert the ongoing relevance of Islam
as a rich source of cultural capital.63
New Spirituality. The New Spiritualists' claims that consciousness is the ground of re-
ality, and that all life is merging toward unity, comprise a metanarrative that, like all others,
Postmodernists reject. At the same time, however, some aspects of New Spirituality bear
a striking resemblance to postmodern thought. What Buddhists call "the Middle Way" a
school of thought initiated by a teacher named Nagarjuna who lived around one hundred to
two hundred years after the birth of Christ, suggests that things do not exist independently
of our apprehending them.6 "Things" are empty of the qualities we consider to be existence,
and as the Dalai Lama claims, "Emptiness is the ultimate truth."5 Middle Way Buddhism
and Postmodernism have a lot in common.
Secularism. Secularism makes claims to absolute truth based in science and rationality.
Paul Kurtz, in Humanist Manifesto 2000, described Postmodernism as nihilistic in its claim
that nothing can be known or communicated. Objective truth is knowable, Kurtz declared,
and science offers "reasonably objective standards for judging its truth claims." Kurtz saw
science as a true metanarrative: "Science has become a universal language, speaking to all
men and women no matter what their cultural backgrounds?% As you might expect, Post-
modernism rejects Secularism's claims. The metanarrative Secularism holds to be true, that
objective reason based on scientific knowledge is possible, is the very claim against which
Postmodernism reacted in the first place.
Marxism. According to Glenn Ward, the vast majority of mainstream Postmodernists
emerged from the Marxist atheistic tradition. Michel Foucault, for example, was at one time
a member of the French Communist Party and at another time with a Maoist organization. 68
Jean Baudrillard wrote "within a loosely Marxist framework, thinking it was his responsi-
bility to "bring Marx up to date? During its early years, Marxism promised a this-worldly
salvation for the enlightened irreligious. However. the passage of time and countless body
bags led postmodernists to reject the Marxist metanarrative while maintaining a similar
understanding of class oppression. Postmodernism. as a "wavward stepchild of Marxism" is
now orphaned from its parent.?°
8. CONCLUSION
Postmodernist Melville Herskovits wrote, "Even the facts of the physical world are dis-
corned through the enculturative screen, so that heretion of time distance weight,
size, and other 'realities' is mediated by the conventions of any group"71 To which Hadley
Arkes responded,
- bo
Happily for us all, this argument is fatally vulnerable to the recognition, accessible to
the educated, the uneducated — and even, at times, to the overeducated — that there is a
material world out there. That world happens to be filled with facts (truths] that do not
depend for their existence as facts on the "experience" or the subjective "perceptions"
of individuals. Even if the "enculturative screen" of Jersey City affected its natives with
fanciful "perceptions" of "distance, the actual distance between Jersey City and Paris
is very likely to remain the same.?
Arkes, a well-respected professor of political science at Amherst College, was onto some-
thing. Postmodernism isn't so much incorrect as it is fanciful at turns, pompous at others,
and melodramatic on the whole.
As this chapter draws to a close, let's take a moment to shed light on Postmodernism's
flaws so those who find their pulse quickened by its self-portrait can bring their thoughts
and feelings into balance.
Postmodernism highlights important concerns but takes them too far. Yes, we can ac-
knowledge differences between people groups, but these differences do not make it impossible
to communicate even with people whose life experiences and cultural backgrounds are very
different from our own. We can recognize that our experiences are a large part of who we
are and yet make reasonable decisions about how to judge between competing viewpoints.
Yes, we are shaped by our cultures, but this does not mean we cannot perceive reality as it
actually is. The Ferrari we talked about earlier does exist in physical space and time, and our
perceptions of it can match the perceptions of others; maybe we think it's cool because it
actually is shaped in what can be generally acknowledged as an aesthetically pleasing manner.
Yes, we ought to study the way language is used to manipulate people, and there are many
instances of this kind of manipulation, but this does not mean all language use is therefore
manipulation. Yes, it is interesting to trace the cultural roots of language and study how
different traditions describe the world differentlv. but this does not mean the gulf between
culture is impassable. Postmodernism is not harmless; it will bite. But it can also be tamed.
Postmodernism is blind to the true power struggle language brings about. If each
community, through its use of language, determines what is true, then who decides between
rival communities in conflict (such as arose with suttee, the Hindu practice of burning a
widow on her deceased husband's pyre; or with exterminating the Jewish people through
systematic genocide; or with socialism's goal to abolish private ownership of property)? Since
no community can claim to know what is objectively "right in these situations, we have no
real resources to draw on in opposing a person or group of people (such as Adolf Hitler and
the Nazis) who decide to dispense with our cultural preferences and do whatever they want.
Even today we are witnesses to this kind of escalation between warring factions, from the
college campus to the political arena to the international scene.
Postmodernists contradict themselves. Take, for example, the phrase "True for you
but not for me" or (more consistent with postmodern thinking) "You aren't in a position
to know what is true for me" Either way, the Postmodernist has made a statement her phi-
losophy cannot unhold. If the person making this statement means to apply it to you, then
you might properly respond, "I get the impression that vou think I should believe what you
just said. If that is the case, why are you imposing your concept of truth on me?" Some of


<!-- page-12 (book p.169) -->

Postmodernism's self-contradictory nature can be seen
Deconstructionists believe
in authorial intent when
they are the authors but
deny that intent when
it comes to anyone
else's works.
in deconstructionists approach to their own writings.
D. A. Carson says he has never met a deconstructionist
who would be pleased if a reviewer misinterpreted his
work. He notes, "In practice deconstructionists implic-
itly link their own texts with their own intentions. 73
In other words, deconstructionists believe in authorial
intent when they are the authors but deny that intent
when it comes to anyone else's works.
Postmodernism's view of personhood is unsettling. Jürgen Habermas is a respected
German Secularist philosopher who is concerned about Postmodernism's rejection of what
makes us human. Glenn Ward explains:
Habermas sees Postmodernism's apparent embrace of irrationality as morally bankrupt
and believes ... that some sort of universally agreed-upon framework is both possible
and necessary in order to ensure that freedom and justice are achieved. Habermas
disputes the claims of some Postmodern thinkers that human identity is unstable,
fragmented, or "in process": for him we all, deep down, share eternal human needs
and desires. The failure of the Postmodernists is that they refuse to propose a route
towards the fulfillment of these.?4
The idea of the "self" as nothing more than a collage of social constructions is at odds
with what we know of ourselves and others. Is it possible we act as if human nature exists
because it actually does?
Postmodernism, when applied, can lead to grotesque results. For a telling example,
look at the results of applying deconstructionism to law in the 1973 Roe v. Wade decision
legalizing abortion on demand. In handing down their decision, the majority of the Supreme
Court justices chose to look at the Constitution as a "living document"— that is, open to
many interpretations (polysemy). As a result, they invented new meanings from the origi
nal text-meanings that were not openly stated-and came up with a novel interpretation
regarding a woman's reproductive rights previously unnoticed for almost two hundred years.
Since then, more than fifty million unborn children have been murdered at the request of
their mothers. Babies have no "essential" nature, and therefore it is impossible to know what
exactly it is we should be protecting.
Misunderstanding the relationship between words and meaning casts us adrift in the
often turbulent sea of human relationships. Confucius said, "When words lose their mean-
ings, people lose their freedom. But there is a more serious consequence. As Michael
Bauman points out, and as the slaughter of hundreds
Misunderstanding the
relationship between
words and meaning casts
us adrift in the often
turbulent sea of human
relationships.
of millions of innocents in the twentith century amply
demonstrates, when words lose their meaning, people
lose their lives.76
Postmodernism can push us to hone our ability to
communicate accurately so as to account for the textures
and nuances and shades of meaning that make up human
interaction. From the Christian perspective, though,
this task is important not because it is academically amusing but because our understanding
of God's nature and character blossoms through the exercise. How so? The Bibles answer
is clear: "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was
God" (John 1:1). God is a communicative God, and he desires for us to communicate with
precision and grace. This is exactly what he himself has done in nature and in Scripture
which is why early philosophers deemed theology the study of God- to be the "queen of
the sciences? It is to the sometimes puzzling but always relevant discipline of theology that
we now turn our attention.
ENDNOTES
1. Rigoberta Menchu, I, Rigoberta Menchu: An Indian Woman in Guatemala, ed. Elisabeth Burgos-Debray, trans. Ann
Wright (Brooklyn, NY: Verso Books, 1984), 172-79.
2. David Stoll, Rigoberta Menchu and the Story of All Poor Guatemalans (Oxford, UK: Westview, 1999).
3. Quoted in Stoll, Rigoberta Menchu, back cover.
4. Quoted in Robin Wilson, "Anthropologist Challenges Veracity of Multicultural Icon," Chronicle of Higher Education,
January 15, 1999, http://chronicle.com/article/Anthropologist-Challenges/5194/.
5. Quoted in Robert Strauss, "Truth and Consequences," Alumni, May/June 1999, accessed March 18, 2014, http://
alumni.stanford.edu/get/page/magazine/article/?article_id=40702.
6. Richard Rorty, Achieving Our Country: Leftist Thought in Twentieth-Century America (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 1998), 96. The correspondence theory of truth says a proposition is true or false depending on how it matches
up with, or corresponds to, the real world.
7. Myron B. Penner, ed., Christianity and the Postmodern Turn (Grand Rapids: Brazos, 2005), 30.
8. Penner, Christianity and the Postmodern Turn.
9. Kevin J. Vanhoozer, ed., Postmodern Theology (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press), 76.
10. James K.A. Smith, "Who's Afraid of Postmodernism?, in Penner, Christianity and the Postmodern Turn, 225. See also
R. Scott Smith, "Is Man the Measure? Truth and Postmodernism in Perspective," unpublished manuscript.
1l. Postmodernists were not the first to offer such a view of knowledge. Bertrand Russell held a similar view-"all
truths are particular truths." See Mary Midgley, Evolution as a Religion (London: Routledge, 2002), 127. Midgley offers a
classic critique of this position, quoting Ludwig Wittgenstein that "particular propositions cannot always be prior to
general ones. Both are elements in language, which is itself an element in our whole system of behaviour. In a crucial
sense, the whole is always prior to its parts. And unquestionably this kind of belief in a law-abiding universe... is a
precondition of any possible physical science."
12. Vanhoozer, Postmodern Theology, 10-13.
13. R. Scott Smith says that "on a naturalistic, evolutionary account of human nature, there are no essences (15
Man the Measure? " 142). To Postmodernists, it is possible to describe what you think people agree on, but you cannot
say that anything is actually "true" or "false" or "good" or "evil." Smith deals with this in his book in Search of Moral
Knowledge: Overcoming the Fact-Value Dichotomy (Downers Grove, IL: Inter Varsity, 2014.
14. Quoted in Scott Consigny, "Nietzsche's Reading of the Sophists," Rhetoric Review 13, no. 1(1994): 7.
15. Quoted in Julian Young, A Philosophical Biography of Friedrich Nietzsche (New York: Cambridge University Press,
16. Quoted in Young, Philosophical Biography of Friedrich Nietzsche, 34.
17. Quoted in Young, Philosophical Biography of Friedrich Nietzsche, 36.
18. Friedrich Nietzeche The Gav Science, trans Walter Kaufmann (New York: Random House. 1974), 181. For a clear
and understandable analysis of Nietsche's anti-Cod and anti-Christ positions, see Will Durant, The Story of Philosoph
(lew York: Simon and Schuster, 1923), chapnt-
19. John Coffey, "Life after Death of God? Michel Foucault and Postmodern Atheism" Cambridge Papers, December
1996, www.jubile-centre.org/document.php?id=15.
20. Michel Foucault, The Order of Things: An Archaeoloey of the Human Sciences (New York: Vintage Books, 1994), 385
Students reading Foucault need to keep in mind his own admission, "I am fully aware that I have never writter
anything other than fictions Outed in Hubert Drefus and Daul Rabinow, Michel Foucault: Beyond Structuralism and
Hermeneutics, 2nd ed. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1983), 204; also in Penner, Christianity and the Postmodern


<!-- page-13 -->

21. Postmodernists who identify with the Christian tradition, of which there are a few who proceed through
academic arguments rather than popular ones, also posit a "hermeneutices of finitude"- that we are finite andlimited
in our humanness, so we must be humble or chastened in our claims. We must be careful in saying this, though. If
we take this view too far, we might end up saying we cannot understand things Scripture clearly commands us to
understand-in which case we make an idol out of our reluctance. This is not humility-it is stubborn sinfulness.
22. Daniel Dennett, The Intentional Stance (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1989), 319n8.
23. Edmund Husserl, Logical Investigations, trans. J. N. Findlay (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1970), 2:603.
24. Quoted in Charles F. Hockett, "The Origins of Speech," Scientific American 203, no. 3(1960): 89.
25 Quoted in Basil Bernstein, Class, Codes and Control: Theoretical Studies towards a Sociology of Language (New York:
Schocken, 1971), 26.
26. Martin Heidegger, Poetry, Language, Thought (New York: Harper, 2001), 197.
27. George Orwell, Nineteen Eighty-Four (New York: Signet, 1949), 46.
28. Orwell, Nineteen Eighty-Four.
29. Kevin J. Vanhoozer, Is There a Meaning in This Text? (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1998), 158.
30. Glenn Ward, Teach Yourself Postmodernism, 2nd ed. (Chicago: McGraw-Hill, 2003), 162.
31. Jean-François Lyotard, The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press, 1984), xxiv.
32. For a more complete definition of anti-realism, see Robert Audi, ed., The Cambridge Dictionary of Philosophy, 2nd ed.
(Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1999), 33, which reads in part, "rejection, in one form or another form
or area of inquiry, of realism, the view that there are knowable mind-independent facts, objects, or properties."
33. It is important to note that a worldview also includes what we pay attention to (or ignore) and the habits formed
by this attention or lack thereof. What we pay attention to or refuse to acknowledge forms our hopes and fears,
and results in patterns of behavior. We are grateful to R. Scott Smith for explaining this, and to J. P. Moreland for
recognizing it as a subtle but important nuance. For more information see J. P. Moreland, "Two Areas of Reflection
and Dialogue with John Franke," Philosophia Christi 8 (2006): 307-8; R. Scott Smith, "Is Man the Measure? Truth and
Postmodernism in Perspective," unpublished manuscript available from scott.smith@biola.edu; and "Religiously
Based Moral Knowledge-and Final Issues," in Smith, In Search of Moral Knowledge, chap. 13.
34. Those four worldviews are (1) Postmodern-ironist: truth is socially constructed; (2) Scientific-rational: truth
is found through disciplined inquiry (similar to what we call Secularism in this book); (3) Social-traditional: truth
is found in the principles of Western civilization; and (4) Neo-romantic: truth is found through harmony with
nature (similar to what we call New Spirituality in this book). Walter Truett Anderson, Fontana Postmodernism Reader
(Waukegan, IL: Fontana, 1996).
35. Daniel A. Farber and Suzanna Sherry, Beyond All Reason: The Radical Assault on Truth in American Law (Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press, 1997), 124.
36. Nancy Pearcey, Total Truth: Liberating Christianity from Its Cultural Captivity (Wheaton, IL: Crossway Books, 2004), 114.
37. See R. Scott Smith, Naturalism and Our Knowledge of Reality (Burlington, VI: Ashgate, 2012), chap. 5.
38. Paul Feyerabend, "Anything Goes, quoted in Walter Truett Anderson, ed., The Truth about the Truth (New York:
Tarcher, 1995), 199-200.
39. To understand how much of science has become politicized, see Tom Bethell's The Politically Incorrect Guide to
Science (Washington, DC: Regnery, 2005).
40. Michael Polanyi, Personal Knowledge: Towards a Post-Critical Philosophy (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1974).
41. Thomas S. Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, 3rd ed. (1962; Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996).
42. Millard J. Erickson, Truth or Consequences: The Promise and Perils of Postmodernism (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity,
43. Kuhn, Structure of Scientific Revolutions, 16-19.
44. Douglas R. Hofstadter, Cödel, Escher, Bach: An Eternal Golden Braid, 20th anniv. ed. (1979; New York: Basic Books,
45. Marcia Ascher, Ethnomathematics: A Multicultural View of Mathematical Ideas (Belmont, CA: Wadsworth, 1991), 193.
46. Walter Trutt Anderson, Really Isn't What It Used to Be: Theatrical Politics, Ready-to- Wear Religion, Global Myths, Primitive
Chic, and Other Wonders of the Postmodern World (New York: HarperCollins, 1990), 3.
47. madair Macintyre attempts to respond to this argument by saying that there is a way to understand another
form of life's language, and that is by becoming an insider and learning their language. From this new standpoint
sou can evaluate which way of life has the rationally superior resources. Rationality is tradition dependent, he
saye, but ve can stil adjudicate between rivals. But is this even possible? R. Scot Smith writes, "fall experience 1s
interpreted, then even our experience of ourselves, as well as of the language, culture, and rational resources of that
second way of life leven from within it) would be interpreted. It seems, therefore, that we would interpret this allen
way ten lite according to our primary way of life, which could well involve translation land mistranslation, for that
matter)," See "Assessing MacIntyre's and Hauerwas's Projects," In Search of Moral Knowledge, chap. 10.
48. Jacques Derrida, Writing and Difference (London: Routedge, 2001), 370.
49. See Elizabeth A. Clark, History, Theory, Text: Historians and the Linguistic Turn (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 2004), 42-43, for a discussion of early Postmodern neories and Marxist historical teleology
50. David F. Ruccio and Jack Amariglio, Postmodern Moments in Modern Economics (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press, 2003), 167.
51. Christian Postmodernists such as James k. A. Smith, Merold Westphal, Nancey Murphy, Stalley Hauerwas, an
ANasdair Macintyre, would disagree strongly with this claim, but we would press them to identify a philosophical or
theological basis for such a nature that transcends culture or interpretation.
52. Ruccio and Amariglio, Postmodern Moments, 134.
53. Anderson, Reality Isn't What It Used to Be, 3.
54. Mitchell Stephens, "To Thine Own Selves Be True"" Los Angeles Times Magazine, August 23, 1992, accessed February
11, 2016, www.nyu.edu/classes/stephens/Postmodern%20psych%20page.htm.
55. Kenneth J. Gergen, The Saturated Self: Dilemmas of Identity in Contemporary Life (New York: Basic Books, 2000), 174.
56. Rorty, Achieving Our Country, 18.
57. R. Scott Smith's definition of brute fact is something that does not have an explanation but is the kind of thing we
could and should expect to have. See Smith, Naturalism and Our Knowledge of Reality, chap. 5.
58. Richard Rorty, Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1980), 318.
59. This is reminiscent of the Marxist dialectic (thesis, antithesis, and synthesis) in which the synthesis of agreement
becomes a new thesis, disagreement is the antithesis, and the process is never ending.
60. Alister McGrath, The Twilight of Atheism (New York: Doubleday, 2004), 227.
61. R. J. Rummel, Death by Government (New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction, 1994).
62. Thanks to Alex McLellan for this helpful analogy, which he explores in his book A Jigsaw Guide to Making Sense of
the World (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity, 2012).
63. This particular philosophical tradition was developed among Iranian scholars and is articulated in philosophical
journals, such as Falsafeh: The Iranian Journal of Philosophy and Hekmat va Falsafeh.
64. The Dalai Lama, A Profound Mind (New York: Three Rivers, 2011), 87.
65. Dalai Lama, Profound Mind, 90.
66. Paul Kurtz, Humanist Manifesto 2000: A Call for a New Planetary Humanism (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2000), 22.
67. Ward, Teach Yourself Postmodernism, 78.
68. Mark Lilla, The Reckless Mind: Intellectuals in Politics (New York: New York Review of Books, 2001), 150.
69. Ward, Teach Yourself Postmodernism, 78.
70. Lawrence E. Cahoone, ed., From Modernism to Postmodernism: An Anthology, 2nd ed. (Malden, MA: Blackwell, 2003),
45. Also see Gene Edward Veith, Postmodern Times: A Christian Guide to Contemporary Thought and Culture Wheaton, IL:
Crossway Books, 1994), 75-76.
71. Melville Herskovits, Cultural Relativism (New York: Vintage Books, 1972), 15.
72. Hadley Arkes, First Things: An Inquiry into the First Principles of Morals and Justice (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press, 1986), 145.
T3. D.A. Carson, The Gagging of God: Christianity Confronts Pluralism (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1996), 103.
74. Ward, Teaching Yourself Postmodernism, 179.
15. Quoted in F. A. Hayek, The Fatal Conceit. The Errors of Socialism (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1989), 106.
16. Michael Bauman makes this statement in a lecture titled "The Meaning of Meaning given frequently at Summit
Ministries' twelve-day conferences. To view the lecture go to www.summit.org/resources/summit-lecture-series
the-meaning-of-meaning/.
