# Chapter 9

<!-- page-1 (book p.9) -->

CHAPTER
1. PHILOSOPHY: THE LOVE OF WISDOM
Chinese philosopher Zhuangzi posed this riddle more
than two thousand years ago, and philosophy students have
been rolling their eyes ever since:
Once upon a time, 1, Chuang Chou, dreamt I was a
butterfly, fluttering hither and thither, to all intents
and purposes a butterfly. I was conscious only of my
happiness as a butterfly, unaware that I was Chou.
Soon I awaked, and there I was, veritably myself
again. Now I do not know whether I was then a man
dreaming I was a butterfly, or whether I am now a
butterfly, dreaming I am a man.!
Some take Zhuangzis question as a serious challenge. Most
find it amusing but irrelevant, a sort of parlor trick to keep us
entertained during commercials. "If a tree falls in a forest and
no one hears it, does it make a sound?"


<!-- page-2 (book p.201) -->

At the end of the dav, who really cares? Well. Christians should. Jesus said we should love
God with our minds (Luke 10:27)? If we are to love God fully, we must love what God loves.
God loves wisdom. And the love of wisdom forms the academic discipline of philosophy.
As we noted in chapter 1, philosophy comes from the Greek words philo ("friend") and
sophia ("wisdom"). The philosopher seeks to be wisdom's companion in exploring the nature
of reality (metaphysics) and what it means to know epistemology). Before we launch into
the chapter any further, let's take a moment to familiarize ourselves with three key questions
philosophers ask and the technical terms they've devised
Philosophy: the study of
knowledge, truth, and the
nature of ultimate reality.
to explain their way of thinking.
1. "What is ultimately real?" The study of ultimate
reality is called metaphysics. In Greek, the word meta-
physics means "beyond the natural things" (meta means
"beyond"; physics means "natural things"). Some philos-
Metaphysics: the branch
of philosophy that seeks to
understand the nature of
ultimate reality.
ophers are monists (mono is Greek for "one") because
they believe that reality consists ultimately of one sort of
thing. The most common form of monism is material-
ism, which maintains that all reality is, at heart, material.*
Other philosophers are dualists (duo is Greek for "two",
who maintain that reality consists of two sorts of things.
Materialism: the belief that
reality is composed solely
of matter.
The most common form of dualism maintains that the
universe consists of both material and immaterial entities
and properties. So, according to this view, the soul, an
immaterial entity, is just as real as the physical body to
which it is united.
Monism: the belief that
reality is ultimately
composed of one essential
substance.
Philosophers who think that everything that exists
has a material explanation are called naturalists. All nat-
uralists are monists (one reality) because they believe
only the material world exists. On the other hand, most
nonnaturalists are dualists, though some are monists
because they believe only the spiritual world exists and
Dualism: the belief that
reality is ultimately
composed of two essential
substances.
that the physical world is an illusion.
Monism and dualism are both ways of approaching
metaphysics. Both try to answer questions about what
is real. Both grapple with questions such as
• Are we really just material objects, or do we possess a "being" an immaterial aspect
to our nature, such as a soul or mind? What does it mean to "be"?
• Must all things that exist be concrete particulars, like the squirrel on the fence or the
rock in my yard, or is it possible for immaterial things to exist, such as numbers, God,
minds, souls, and so on?
• Can immaterial things form categories like humanness, squirrelness, kindness, or
love? Can categories of meaning be universal and unchanging, describing all humans,
all squirrels, all acts of kindness, and all acts of love?
, "What does it mean to know?" Epistemology is the study of what knowledge is, how
we know, what makes a belief rational to hold, and what actually constitutes knowledge
(episteme is Greek for "knowledge").
Some philosophers think we can only know things
that are discoverable by the scientific method a view
known as scientific empiricism. If this is so, many of
our common-sense beliefs don't count as knowledge. To
Epistemology: the branch
of philosophy that seeks
to understand the nature
people who think this way, beliefs such as "It is wrong to
torture children for fun," or "The Mona Lisa is a beautiful
painting" don't really count as knowledge because they
cannot be explained using the scientific method. Yet we
seem to know these things, so scientific empiricism can-
not be an adequate account of knowledge. There must be
Ways of knowing beyond those the hard sciences employ.
3. "With what part of our being do we contemplate
these questions?" When we think about how we know
Scientific Empiricism:
the belief that we can
know only what we
discover through the
scientific method.
and what it is to know, we are using our mental powers.
But what are mental powers, exactly? Are they merely the
consequence of material causes-like when a cue stick
hits a billiard ball or when two parts hydrogen and one
part oxygen give rise to water? Or is there something
immaterial about us, a soul with the power to engage
in thought and reflection? This question gives rise to
what philosophers call the mind/body problem. Those
interested in the mind/body problem study the relation-
ship of the mind (e.g., mental events, mental functions,
Mind/Body Problem:
the study of the
relationship between
the mind (e.g., mental
events, mental functions,
mental properties, and
consciousness) and the
physical body.
mental properties, and consciousness) to the physical
body. Clearly, humans possess the power and ability to
organize and evaluate their experiences and draw inferences from them. When we see five
living things we judge to be trees and one living thing we judge to be a flower, we conclude
that the first five have in common a nature called treeness, which is different from the sixth
thing, which has a nature called flowerness. But what enables us to make these judgments?
Is this something our brains are doing, or are our minds somehow based in our brains but
rising above them as something separate and nonphysical?®
These three questions—what is ultimately real, what it means to know, and with what
part of our being we contemplate such things-give rise to the rich and complicated field
of philosophy. Based on their underlying assumptions, each of the six worldviews we are
considering in this book approach these questions somewhat differently. We'll look at each
worldview's metaphysics (what it says about the nature of reality and being), its epistemol
with Secularism.
ogy (what it says about knowledge), and its approach to the mind/body problem, starting


<!-- page-3 (book p.203) -->

2. SECULARISM
Secularists list a variety of philosophical positions that fit their worldview: naturalism,
physicalism, materialism, organicism, and other theories "based upon science." But this range
is not as broad as it sounds-—each doctrine listed holds to the same core tenet: the material
world is all that exists. In fact, each of the words listed
is really little more than a synonym for naturalism, the
Naturalism: the belief
that all phenomena can
be explained in terms of
natural causes.
philosophical belief that everything that happens can
be explained in terms of natural causes (e.g., the law of
gravity). If only nature exists, then the immaterial (and
supernatural) —the soul, the afterlife, God —do not exist
by definition.
The commitment to naturalism causes Secularists to be skeptical of the idea of design
in the universe, because if there is design, there might be a designer. The naturalist cannot
accept a designer or a personal first cause. Henry Miller plainly stated, "To imagine that we
are going to be saved by outside intervention, whether in the shape of an analyst, a dictator, a
savior, or even God, is sheer folly." Susan Jacoby explains away the idea of design as nothing
more than a political movement carried out by a group of "slick, media-savvy right-wingers"
whose views are "almost universally rejected by respected mainstream scientists" and who
survive by whipping up resentment toward a supposed "liberal establishment conspiracy to
protect its Darwinist turf"
Secularism is a complete philosophy. Corliss Lamont, one of the founders of the twentieth-
century Secular Humanist movement, proclaimed the rejection of "all forms of supernaturalism,
pantheism, and metaphysical idealism" and his belief in "man's supreme aim as working for
the welfare and progress of all humanity in this one and only life, according to the methods
of reason, science and democracy." Let's look first at the metaphysics of Secularism and then
its epistemology.
Metaphysics. Metaphysics, remember, seeks to answer questions like "What is ultimately
real?" and "Of what does this reality consist?" Secularists believe the physical universe came
into being without a purpose, and that nothing but the universe exists. The late Carl Sagan
summed up Secularism's view: "The Cosmos is all that is or ever was or ever will be"l For
Secularists, no personal first cause exists-only the cosmos. According to Robert G. Inger-
soll, "Nature is but an endless series of efficient causes. She cannot create but she eternally
transforms. There was no beginning and there can be no end"!! Strictly speaking, then - since
physics is all there is to account for everything - Secularism's metaphysics is reducible to physics
(or at least the hard sciences). Because of this, Secularists typically avoid the question of how
this material universe came to be. They often treat the universe as a given that requires no
explanation outside itself. But why is there something rather than nothing? Unfortunately
for Secularists, avoiding the question is not the same as answering the question.
Ironically, the most common understanding of the universes origin, the big bang
theory, seems to lead to the conclusion that the universe had a beginning. All beginnings
we've observed have a cause. If the universe is caused, there must be a first cause, a being
capable of bringing universes into existence, and the characteristics of this first cause must
be sufficient to explain everything we see in the universe today, including value, purpose
mental lives, complexity, moral agency, drama, and
design. This sounds a lot like the Christian conception
of God. Secularism has a very difficult time providing
a satisfying account of what common sense teaches us:
the universe can't explain itself, and human beings are
more than material things but are intrinsically valuable
moral agents with free will and immeasurable dignity.
Epistemology. Secularism's epistemology, or what it
Ironically, the most
common understanding of
the universe's origin, the
big bang theory, seems to
lead to the conclusion
that the universe
had a beginning.
believes about knowledge, is straightforward: the scien-
tifc method. According to Roy Wood Sellars, "The spirit of naturalism would seem to be one
with the spirit of science itself?!? Sellar's statement is imprecise and can lead to the wrong
conclusion. Strictly speaking, science means "the process of using the scientific method to
observe and measure phenomena in the physical world, devise experiments to organize our
observations, improve the accuracy of our measurements, and develop hypotheses we can
test to see if our theories are actually true." What Sellars meant is not just that he liked the
scientific method but that anything he couldn't figure out how to study using the scientific
method couldn't be known-not by Secularists or by anyone else.
If only those things accessible to the scientific method are knowable, and if the scientific
method can access only the natural world, then nothing outside of science, including the im-
material and the supernatural, can be known; metaphysical questions about the immaterial
and the supernatural are automatically ruled out. Questions that were once answered by
appealing to nonscientific concepts, usually associated with religion, such as God, the soul,
or the moral law, are dismissed as "not knowable." Thus, and unsurprisingly, Carl Sagan
admitted that Secularism's answers mean that "science has itself become a kind of religion."!3
The entire worldview of Secularism hangs on the peg of epistemological naturalism:
nothing outside nature can be known, so if it is not accessible using the scientific method, it
cannot be an item of knowledge. Secularists not only believe this; they use it as their method to
understand everything, even though the claim "Everything is natural" could never be known
by using the scientific method. No matter what they study, they begin with the assumption
that only nature exists. This is very important to understand: it is not that Secularists prove
that only natural things can be known. I's that they assume because of their method- that
only natural things in the material universe can be known.
So how do we make decisions affecting the whole societv? As we will see in the "Law"
chapter, Secularists tend to believe in legal positivism, the idea that law is what those in au-
thority have agreed to do. '4 According to Max Hocutt, "Human beings may, and do, make up
their own rules"5 But which human beings, and which rules? In great irony, Secularists end
up grasping for political power to impose their view on others, something they vehemently
oppose when it comes to other worldviews, particularly Christianity.
Mind/body problem. If only the natural world exists, what are human beings? They are,
of course, only matter. The mind can be explained in purely physical terms, as smoke can
be explained by fire. According to Corliss Lamont, "Naturalistic Humanism ... take|s] the
view that the material universe come fret and that mind emerged in the animal man only
after some two billion vear of bioloical evolution upon this material earth "6 This belief is


<!-- page-4 (book p.205) -->

a form of mind/body monism, since it is claiming that
Mind/Body Monism:
the belief that human
beings are composed of
a single substance.
the universe and human beings consist of only one type
of stuff-matter.
Secularism's denial of the immaterial and the su-
pernatural as well as its reliance on science as the only
source of knowledge constrains it to a very specific set
of answers about mortality, mind, and the very nature of humanity. On the one hand, this
means humans control their own fate. On the other hand, without God, a natural moral law,
or an eternal soul, there is no purpose beyond what we can see and measure, and no hope
beyond what we can accomplish in this life. E. A. Burtt said gloomily, "The ultimate accom-
modation necessary in a wise plan of life is acceptance of a world not made for man, owing
him nothing, and in its major processes quite beyond his control"! Even more gloomy is the
view of Scopes trial attorney Clarence Darrow: "The purpose of man is like the purpose of
the pollywog—to wiggle along as far as he can without dying; or, to hang to life until death
takes him. "18
Modern science would
not have arisen if not
for Christianity and its
worldview.
When Lenin said that
matter is primary, he was
implying that matter is
eternal and uncreated,
that life spontaneously
emerged from nonliving,
nonconscious matter over
billions of years, evolving
into mind, thought, and
consciousness.
We'll get to the Christian view of philosophy in a
few pages, but since Secularism seems to concentrate on
Christianity, it is worth pointing out now that Christians
believe science can provide real and important knowl-
edge. The hospitals, charitable organizations, and even
churches Christians founded continually make use of
the advances of modern science to further the gospel
and help people. In fact, as Baylor University sociol-
ogist Rodney Stark has convincingly argued, modern
science would not have arisen if not for Christianity
and its worldview.!
To Christianity, though, science is not the only form
of knowledge. Christians believe our immortal souls
can know God. We can know the natural moral law
and detect design and order in the natural world. Thus
Christianity, like the common sense of the vast majority
of the world's citizens, reiects Secularism's narrow view
of knowledge.
3. MARXISM
Only the material world exists. Marxists sav—no God or gods exist. Karl Marx wrote in
a letter to Friedrich Engels, "As long as we actually observe and think, we cannot possibly
get away from materialism. Engels said, "The materialist world outlook is simply the con-
ception of nature as it is""2)
Vladimir Lenin wrote. "Matter is nrimarv nature Sancation, thought consciousness ar
the highest products of matter organized in a certain way. This is the doctrine of material-
ism, in general, and Marx and Engels, in particular. For Lenin, matter was a philosophical
category denoting objective reality-people, plants, animals, stars, and so on. "Matter is the
obiective reality given to us in sensation. When Lenin said that matter is primary, he was
implying that matter is eternal and uncreated, that life spontaneously emerged from nonliving
nonconscious matter over billions of years, evolving into mind. thought, and consciousness 24
Epistemology. How do we know what we know? According to the Marxist, the answer
is science. Lenin said «The fundamental characteristic of materialism arises from the ob-
¡ectivity of science, from the recognition of objective reality, reflected by science.' Marxist
denies all religious truth claims. Lenin didn't just display confidence in science; he displayed
epistemology, like that of the Secularist, places faith in the exclusive truth of science and
unbounded optimism in his ability to understand and apply what he perceived to be true
from scientific observation. According to Lenin, "Perceptions give us correct impressions
of things. We directly know objects themselves? The objects Lenin spoke of were strictly
material— "Matter is ... the objective reality given to man in his sensations, a reality which is
copied, photographed, and reflected by our sensations?27
According to Marxism, because anything immaterial or supernatural lacks objective,
material reality, we have no means of perceiving it or of gaining knowledge about it. But
this leads to a conflict: Marxism consistently speculates about what it thinks science will
prove to be true, even if it is not yet proved. For example, Marxists will talk of the inevitable
collapse of capitalism and the arrival of the classless society in religious—not scientific—
language. Talk about a future utopia cannot be sustained using the scientific method.
Metaphysics. As previously noted, Marxist theology and philosophy deny the super-
natural. The universe is all that exists and all that ever will exist. For Alexander Spirkin,
a modern Marxist author, "matter is the only existing objective reality: the cause, foun-
dation, content, and substance of all the diversity of the world" Engels said we know
from experience and theory "that both matter and its mode of existence, motion, are
uncreatable *29
But answering "What is real?" merely with "The material world" misses a key aspect
of how Marxists view reality. The material world has a
certain quality to it that allows it to evolve to a state of
perfection. This quality is the dialectic.
Dialectical Materialism:
the belief that only the
You may remember the term dialectical mate-
rialism from the chapter on the Marxist worldview.
material world exists and
The dialectic is the view of history, popularized by the
that class struggles are the
German philosopher Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel,
mechanism behind social
in which the way things are done (thesis) generates its
and economic progress.
own opposition (antithesis), and the resulting clash
leads to a synthesis, which in turn becomes a newer, more advanced thesis.3 The Marxist
take on the dialectic goes like this: Capitalism's excesses generate resentment, which turns
into rebellion. The resulting clack lends to a more enlightened economic form, which again
generates its own opposition, gradually moving toward pure communism. Marxists are so
convinced of the dialectic that they attribute a mystical, almost divine, status to it, even
though they claim to be materialists,?
So what actually is real, according to the Marxist? The answer: the material universe,
but with a divine dialectic quality This divine quality explains the order of the universe, the


<!-- page-5 (book p.207) -->

nature of being, all of history, and everything important
Marxists believe in order
without an orderer,
purpose without a
purposer, and justice
without any transcendent
standard of Good by
which to know that evil
has been vanquished.
about humanity. Marxists believe in order without an
orderer, purpose without a purposer, and justice without
any transcendent standard of Good by which to know
that evil has been vanquished.
Mind/body problem. For the dialectical materialist,
only matter actually exists. It is eternal, and everything
comes from it, even societal interrelationships and what
we consider to be our minds. Maurice Cornforth wrote,
"Mental functions are functions of highly developed
matter, namely, of the brain. Mental processes are brain processes, processes of a material,
bodily organ.*32
For the Marxist, the relationship between the body and the mind is like the relationship
between you and the reflection you see when gazing into a still body of water: the reflection is
not you, but it is an accurate depiction of one aspect of you —namely, your physical appearance.
For Marx, "the ideal is nothing else than the material world reflected by the human mind,
and translated into forms of thought."*3 Lenin echoed Marx: "The existence of the mind is
shown to be dependent upon that of the body, in that the mind is declared to be secondary,
a function of the brain, or a reflection of the outer world."4 Our brains enable us to capture
images of reality, which gives us the sensation of thinking and creates the impression that
we have minds.
Dialectical materialism, then, is the philosophy of Marxism. Science and practical experi-
ence refine knowledge; the universe is infinite and all that will ever exist; matter is eternal and
the ultimate substance; life is a product of this nonliving matter; and the mind is a reflection
of this material reality. As we will see in subsequent chapters, dialectical materialism takes
the Marxist well beyond philosophy. It is an entire method for viewing the world, coloring
the Marxist perception of everything from ethics to history.
4. POSTMODERNISM
Postmodernism seems to draw a line in the sand
Correspondence Theory
of Truth: the view that
the truth of a proposition
is determined by how
accurately it describes the
facts of reality.
in today's universities. Students will likely find Post-
modernism playing a prominent role in humanities and
social-studies courses, while Secularism still holds the
line in science, engineering, and mathematics In terms
of the discipline of philosophy, Postmodernism does not
seem to get much traction. 3 The 2009 version of Oxford
University's popular 856-page Introduction to Philosophy
in its index or glossary of terms?
text contains not a single reference to Postmodernism
Nevertheless, Postmodernism, like every worldview, makes certain philosophical
assumptions, some of which various philosophers have defended. For example, as we
will see, Postmodernism rejects the correspondence theory of truth (the belief that a
proposition is true if it corresponds to reality) and, relatedly, foundationalism (the belie
that we can have a reliable foundation for knowledge).
In its place Postmodernism holds to anti-realism (the
belief that what we think we know of reality is socially
constructed by human thought). Let's explore the
differences between these two philosophies by looking
Foundationalism:
the theory that basic
beliefs exist and form the
foundation for knowledge.
at postmodern epistemology and metaphysics.
Epistemology. Proponents of other worldviews
usually find the Postmodernist's viewpoint on knowl-
edge disorienting. Traditionally, Truth (with a capital
) was understood as the relationship between the
Anti-realism: the denial of
the existence or accessibility
of an objective reality.
real, objective world and propositions about the world.
Our statements about the world, in other words, can truly correspond to the world as
it actually is. For example, according to this view, when we say that an action or person
is just, we mean to say that there is an objective and transcultural standard of justice by
which we can make such judgments, even though "justice" is not a material thing like a
stone, a baby, or a computer.
Postmodernists, on the other hand, claim there is no universal truth, only particular,
subjective truths situated in particular cultural surroundings. There is no way to reliably
know "the real" or the "real world" to which truth can correspond, hence the term anti-
realism. At this point you might be tempted to scream: "What? Of course reality exists! Let
me hit you on the head and see if it really hurts!" But keep in mind what the Postmodernist
is actually saying: our words describe only our interpretation of reality, not reality itself, and
over time our words shape our understanding of reality. If you hit someone on the head,
you aren't proving the existence of reality; you're proving your belief, doubtless derived
from your particular social context, that it's okay to harm others to prove your point. Even
if the other person says "Ouch!" you haven't proved anything about reality "Reality" and all
other concepts are expressions of how, based on our particular situations, we use language
to interpret what exists.
But if words signify only other words, then words can never be used in the pursuit of
Truth. Justice, the anti-realist says, is not something "out there" waiting to be perceived but
a word used to describe the way people in a particular culture decide what to do when two
peoplés preferences come into conflict. To the Postmodernist, "justice"' is not universally
"real"; it is situated in particular times and cultures to serve the needs of people in that
local context.
A classic example of words not referring to reality
is Michel Foucaul's essay "This Is Not a Pipe, in which
he analyzed a 1920s-era painting by Belgian artist René
Magritte picturing a pipe with the phrase Ceci nest pas
une pipe® "This is not a pipe") written beneath. Neither
the picture nor the phrase was a pipe, roucault insisted
but merely a text that simulated a pipe:
To the Postmodernist,
"justice" is not universally
"real"; it is situated in
particular times and
cultures to serve
the needs of people in
that local context.
(Neither words nor the visible| can be reduced to the
other's terms: it is in vain that we say what we see; what


<!-- page-6 (book p.209) -->

we see never resides in what we say. And it is in vain that we attempt to show; by the
use of images, metaphors, or similes, what we are saying... [The drawing] inaugurates
a play of transferences that run, proliferate, propagate, and correspond within the
layout of the painting, affirming and representing nothing, 38
The primary idea behind this wordplay is the postmodern insistence that all human be-
ings are conditioned by their cultures and languages that is, their situations in life. We are
finite creatures who are unable to gain a God's-eye view of the world. Our situations require
us to interpret the world; universal, objectively true statements of fact are simply not possible.
To Postmodernists, any given statement, such as "The clouds are pink,, "Water is wet"
or "Let justice roll down," is true for only a small community of individuals who interpret
that statement based on their own language and culture. In fact, they see it as true only as
long as the community in question agrees upon this
particular usage. Occasionally you'll hear someone say,
To Postmodernists, any
given statement, such as
"The clouds are pink,"
"Water is wet," or "Let
justice roll down," is
true for only a small
community of individuals
who interpret that
statement based on their
own language and culture.
"That is true for you, but not for me." Here's what he
or she means: "In your interpretive community, such a
claim makes sense, but not in mine. Your claim has no
power over me."
According to Richard Rorty, truth is whatever his
community of scholars allowed him to get away with.
Rorty, before his death, regularly quoted the French revo-
lutionary Denis Diderot in his speeches: "Man will never
be free until the last king is strangled with the entrails of
the last priest."39 Presumably, if Rorty's community let
him get away with it, and they did, then the impression
that he was actually advocating such a thing would be left to stand. To Postmodernists, "reality"
is not what objectively exists; it is only our agreement about what is. We do not discover true
facts about the real world—we interpret what we see and cannot truly know reality.
Rorty and other Postmodernists arent just being silly when they say things like this. There
are, in fact, many examples of scholars in history "getting away with" theories now believed
to have been mistaken. Take, for example, the theory of Claudius Ptolemy (AD 90-168)
that the sun revolves around the earth (geocentrism).
To Postmodernists,
"reality" is not what
objectively exists; it is
only our agreement
about what is.
For a long time scientists thought Ptolemy was correct,
not because they were stupid or afraid of the church
(the common explanations we hear today, but because
Ptolemy's predictions about the movement of planetary
bodies actually worked out to their reasonable satisfac-
tion. It wasn't until much later, when Copernicus (AD
1473-1543) and Galileo (AD 1564-1642) developed new
calculations and methods of observation, that scientists changed their minds.
To Rorty's way of thinking, geocentrism was a temporary "truth" that scientists "got
away with" as long as no one challenged them. It was "true" because it worked——it made
sense of the evidence of the physical world, and it seemed to conveniently correspond to
the teaching of Scripture, which pleased the religious people whose support made scientific
- 208.
exploration possible. Scientists got away with it, so ac-
cording to Rorty, it was true for them at that time. The
idea that truth proceeds from what works rather than
what is actually real is called pragmatism.
Unsurprisingly, Christian philosophers mostly re-
ject Rorty's argument. If knowledge is "justified true
belief" —true when the evidence justifies it and when
Pragmatism: the belief
that propositions do not
mirror reality and should
therefore be treated
as tools and judged
only by their practical
consequences.
it corresponds to reality-the geocentric model of the
universe is a "justified false belief" a theory that made
sense at the time but now is not counted as knowledge
because it was never true.
Knowledge: justified
true belief.
Rorty's argument has found wide acceptance in
academic circles (except among most Christian philos-
ophers) because of his commitment to constructivism
(the idea that we can understand nature only by develop-
ing mental constructs to explain our sensory perceptions,
and that our models of the world are all we can really
know about the world). It is worth taking a moment to
reflect on Rorty's point from a Christian worldview, even
though we have not yet reached the Christian worldview
section of the chapter. Just because something is appar-
ently helpful or justified does not mean it is true. False
Constructivism:
the belief that scientific
knowledge is merely a
helpful social construct
for understanding human
sensory perceptions of
reality but not direct and
accurate knowledge
of reality itself.
beliefs, even if widely held, do not count as knowledge.
Sin affects more than our motives. It affects our ability
to properly understand God's truth. Anyone who has ever been embarrassingly wrong knows
how important it is to remain humble, even when he thinks he's right. Philosophers call this
epistemological humility.
The search for knowledge that is "so true that we don't even need God" usually comes
back to bite Christians. At the time of Ptolemy and throughout the Middle Ages, the evidence
forgeocentrism was so compelling that those who disagreed with it faced ridicule. Of course,
Christians didn't want to be seen as "unscientific, so they went back to the Bible and dis-
covered" verses "proving" that the earth was the center of the universe. Ultimately, though,
this strategy backfired. When the theory changed, the church was left awkwardly defending
an outdated scientific doctrine. Once again today, Christians are ridiculed for being embar-
rassingly behind the times. However, we shouldn't panic or be too hasty to reinterpret the
Bible to "prove" that Christianity is up to date with modern theories. Rather, we should be
humble about ourselves, confident in God, and willing to trade in false beliefs for true ones,
immature thoughts for mature ones, and weaker explanations for stronger ones.
Metaphysics. Kevin J. Vanhoozer, a shrewd observer of the postmodern scene and a
somewhat sympathetic critic, traces Postmodernism's foundational ideas back to Friedrich
Nietzsche." Vanhoozer writes, "Nietzsche, the patron saint of postmodernity, prophesied
accuratel. if Cod is dead then it's interpretation 'all the wav down'... One word only points
to another word and never to reality itself. No one interpretation can ever be regarded as


<!-- page-7 -->

final. As in interpretation, so in life: everything becomes undecidable."41 Without God as our
ultimate authority, we take it upon ourselves to interpret reality.
So what is really real? Certainly not essences or substances or literal identities. For the
Postmodernist, these are merely words. To pursue knowledge and existence is just to play
word games. Here's a bafling but revealing example: in 1991 French cultural theorist Jean
Baudrillard wrote an essay, The Gulf War Did Not Take
Place, in which he claimed that the Gulf War was not real
Without God as our
ultimate authority, we
take it upon ourselves to
interpret reality.
but was merely simulated for CNN television.
Of course, Baudrillard did not say that no bombs
were dropped. Rather, he argued that calling these par-
ticular military maneuvers a "war" was a question of
how the parties involved defined war, how both Saddam
Hussein and the Allied forces used words to shore up their power and get people to see things
their way, and how brief clips of anti-aircraft fire were repeatedly played to give the impression
that the story the Allied forces told was describing what was actually "real." In the end, the
intentions of Hussein were not defeated, Baudrillard argued, so the phrase Gulf War refers
not to a set of actions that actually took place but to a use of words—of effective rhetoric-
that describe a particular viewpoint.*2 The relevance of lives being lost and property being
destroyed did not seem to concern Baudrillard; he was obviously severely criticized for this.
As Glenn Ward notes, Baudrillard's piece has been used "to discredit not only Baudrillard, but
Postmodernism's abandonment of truth and evaluation 43 Words make a difference. Calling
an unborn human a "fetus" or "product of conception" but not a "baby" or "person" changes
peoples perceptions of the unborn human's value and
makes abortion more permissible.
Words make a difference.
Calling an unborn
human a "fetus" or
"product of conception"
but not a "baby" or
"person" changes people's
perceptions of the unborn
human's value and
makes abortion more
permissible.
Fans of the cult-classic movie The Matrix might be
interested to know that when Morpheus said to Neo,
"Welcome to the desert of the real," he was quoting a
phrase from Baudrillard's 1981 book Simulacra and
Simulation. It's probably not important, but it does
give you an idea of where his-and other postmodern
writers'-mind-bending ideas lead.
Postmodern philosophy and Christian philosophy,
as we've explained it, could hardly be further apart.**
Nearly everything about Christianity is expected to be
understood, not merely interpreted, and to be under-
The Christian worldview
maintains that these
categories of meaning-
creation, sin, redemption,
love-all exist
independent of our ability
to perceive them.
stood as universal in scope and application. God created
the whole universe including male and female persons
every one of whom is universally affected by sin. God
loved the whole world. Christ died for the sins of the
whole world, not just one or two particular communi-
ties. Christians are to love God with all their hearts and
minds and their fellow human beings around the worla.
The Christian worldview maintains that these categories
of meaning-creation, sin, redemption, love-all exist independent of our ability to perceive
them. They come from the mind of God. Our failure to acknowledge them does not make
them any less true.
thoughts and things have any truly understandable essence, Christianity says God chose to
Up against the postmodern insistence on the indeterminacy of words and the denial that
and the language of the heavens (Ps. 19). The meaning of God's words do not depend upon
communicate the Truth about himself and his world by words contained in the Scriptures
the reader's interpretation, though Scripture itself calls us to study, reflect on, and apply its
words to our lives.*s What a passage "means to me" is secondary to understanding what God
intended to plainly communicate. Further, we aren't
alone. We need other believers. The body of Christ has
many parts (Rom. 12:4).4 Most important, we need the
What a passage "means
Holy Spirit. As the apostle Peter said, "No prophecy of
to me" is secondary to
Scripture comes from someone's own interpretation.
understanding what
For no prophecy was ever produced by the will of man,
God intended to plainly
communicate.
but men spoke from God as they were carried along
by the Holy Spirit" (2 Pet. 1:20-21).
But what about the postmodern challenge? Do people use words in a way that leads others
to see the world other than as God created it? Of course! The Bible calls it "[bearing] false
witness" (Exod. 20:16). The departure from what we know to be true is, to the Christian, a
demonstration of the presence of sin.
5. NEW SPIRITUALITY
New Spirituality looks down its nose at typical philosophical concerns, such as concerns
for definitions, creating and distinguishing categories, and making logical arguments. Distinc-
tions between ideas like is or is not. true or false, good or evil are mere human conceptions.
Categories and distinctions-and other such philosophical matters—do not describe the world
as it actually is. In The Power of Myth, one of New Spirituality's most admired books, Joseph
Campbell said, "The mystery of life is beyond all human conception... We always think in
terms of opposites. But God, the ultimate, is beyond the pairs of opposites, that is all there
is to it"47 Neale Donald Walsch, a popular author who made a fortune claiming to channel
God's thoughts into his books, said, "All things are One Thing. There is only One Thing, and
all things are part of the One Thing That Is.4
The term that we think best describes this view is spiritual monism. Both Secularists and
New Spiritualists are monists. However, while Secularists
limit reality to only physical matter, New Spiritualists
propose exactly the opposite-what is really real is the
spiritual, not the physical. Obviously, by asserting that
Spiritual Monism:
the belief that reality is
ultimately divine.
the essence of its subject matter is beyond human com-
prehension, New Spiritualitv creates little space for itself
in today's philosophy department, where comprehending, understanding, and reasoning ar
pretty much the whole point of philosophizing. About the only aspect of New Spirituality
of concern to philosonhers is its roots in Eastern religions like Buddhism, Hinduism, an


<!-- page-8 (book p.213) -->

Confucianism, traditions through which more than two billion people in the world today
think about reality.
Still, there are a handful of New Spiritualist thinkers who take philosophy seriously.
One of these is Ken Wilber, whose book A Brief History of Everything tackles many common
philosophical problems from a New Spiritualist viewpoint. Even if most New Spiritualists
are not deeply philosophical, the widespread nature of New Spirituality in the culture justifies
our examination of its views regarding reality and knowledge.
Metaphysics. From the perspective of New Spirituality, what is real? Ultimate reality is
consciousness, "the essence of existence, the life force within all things."so Secularism and
Marxism say that only nature exists. New Spirituality, on the other hand, says that only spirit
exists. Robert Muller suggests this when he says, "Oh God, I know that I come from you,
that I am part of you, that I will return to you, and that there will be no end to my rebirth
in the eternal stream of your splendid creation.""! What it means to "be" is entirely spiritual.
New Spiritualist metaphysics, then, begins by rejecting that "only the physical world
exists." David Spangler says, "From a very early age I was aware of an extra dimension or
presence to the world around me, which as I grew older I came to identify as a sacred or
transcendental dimension."52 The spiritual is very real, and if a person doesn't perceive it,
then he is misperceiving. Everything has a spiritual nature, a sacred component. Recall the
lyrics from "Colors of the Wind," in the Disney classic Pocahontas: "You think... the Earth
is just a dead thing you can claim / But I know every rock and tree and creature / Has a life,
has a spirit, has a name?"53
In singing this song the Pocahontas character implores Captain John Smith to see beyond
the physical to the spiritual, because the spiritual is all that is actually real. This is pantheism, the
idea that from a grain of sand to the Milky Way, everything is spiritual-whether we call it God,
Gaia, or the force. According to Fritjof Capra, "The universe is no longer seen as a machine, made
up of a multitude of objects, but has to be pictured as one indivisible, dynamic whole whose
parts are essentially interrelated and can be understood only as patterns of a cosmic process.
Christians can, of course, agree that nature is not merely a machine. Human beings have
an organic nature with an intrinsic purpose and ends. Machines have only the purpose or ends
imposed on them by their manufacturers. New Spirtualists, though, tend to think that all reality
iS immaterial (monism), whereas Christians view it as both material and immaterial (dualism).
Epistemology. To the question of what we can know and how, New Spiritualists claim
that we can only really know bansales beyond the mere appearances of the physical world.
We need to get in touch with consciousness or even our "higher selves?" Failure to do this not
only leaves us without knowledge of what is real, but it also keeps us powerless in the face
of other peoples conceptions of reality. Shakti Gawain says, "When we consistently suppress
and distrust our intuitive knowingness, looking instead for [external) authority, validation,
and approval from others, we giudde pur ersonal power away"5 Ultimately, Joseph Campbell
said, concern about questions of philosophy drains the "aliveness" out of life:
What's the meaning of the universe? What's the meaning of a flea? T's just there. That's
it. And your own meaning is that you're there. Were so engaged in doing things to
achieve purposes of outer value that we forget that the inner value, the rapture that is
associated with being alive, is what it's all about.56
To New Spiritualists, truth is known by feeling or experience, not by scientific know-
edge. Knowledge does not contain the meaning of lite. Marilyn Ferguson stated, "We need
not postulate a purpose for this Ultimate Cause nor wonder who or what caused whatever
Big Bang launched the visible universe. There is only the experience?s
Mind/body problem. New Spirituality's approach to the mind/body problem is to say
that what we call our "body" is actually just a manifestation of spirituality. In terms of the
quality of physical existence, there is no "there." In the words of the Dalai Lama, "Emptiness
is a quality of all phenomena. As Nagarjuna states, 'There is no phenomenon that is not
dependently originated; there is nothing that is not empty? "58
In New Spiritualist philosophy, all is one. Therefore, only one type of ultimate reality can
exist, and its essence is spiritual. Spirit is the only substance; matter is only its manifestation.
The point is not understanding reality but experiencing it. Marianne Williamson, a popular
New Age feminist author, says that although most people do not think this way, they should:
"To say, "God, please help me, means, 'God, correct my thinking! Deliver me from hell;
means Deliver me from my insane thoughts?"s If you are growing in your experience of
consciousness, the New Spiritualist says, you have all the philosophy you need.
6. ISLAM
During the Middle Ages the early Muslim empires established centers of learning and
developed a strong philosophical tradition. Two developments were especially significant.
First, a group of thinkers called the Mutazilites attempted to evaluate the doctrines of Islam
from a reasoned, philosophical standpoint. This caused controversy among theologians,
since the Mutazilites came to believe that a number of orthodox Muslim doctrines had major
philosophical problems. Among other things, they questioned whether the Quran could be
eternal and uncreated, whether its description of God was philosophically coherent, and
whether God could judge with justice if everything is purely determined by his will
The second major development grew out of medieval Muslim scholars discovering
the works of the Greek philosophers- especially those of Aristotle. Arab Christians had
translated many of these Greek philosophical writings into Arabic, and early Muslim philos-
ophers embarked upon a project attempting to reconcile Aristotelian thought with Islamic
theology. Among those who made the greatest contributions to philosophy and became
well known in the West are al- Farabi (AD 872-950); In Sina (Avicenna in the West; AD
980-1037; and Ibn Rushd (Averroes; AD 1126-1198). These philosophers developed very
sophisticated arguments. However, as was the case with
the Mutazilites, their work raised serious questions
about whether their thinking was genuinely Islamic.
Al-Ghazali (AD 1058-1111), perhaps the greatest
Muslim thinker of all, argued that Islamic philosophy
Fideism: the belief that
faith and reason are
independent or at odds
with one another.
was not genuinely Islamic. Al-Ghazali thought philoso-
phy was ultimately unable to lead to certain knowledge.
as a result, he adopted an Islamilt deism (i.e., believing that faith and reason are independent
of each other) and moved away from icational justification for beliefs and toward mysticism.


<!-- page-9 -->

Al-Ghazali produced powerful philosophical arguments in support of this and, ironically, is
thus regarded as a philosopher himself.61
Most scholars agree with al- Ghazalis assessment that the classical Muslim philosophical
project of harmonizing Islam with Greek metaphysics was largely a failure. His arguments
won the day in medieval times, but philosophy has remained diminished as a discipline
within the Muslim world ever since. A few exceptions exist. Some Sufi thinkers developed
philosophies in support of their mystical approach to knowing God. Strong philosophical
traditions are also rising in Turkey and Iran.®2
It remains questionable whether any Muslim thinker has articulated a distinct philos-
ophy of Islam that obviously coheres with Islamic theology. Nevertheless, it is fair to say
that traditional Islam does display a standard approach to answering the questions raised in
metaphysics, epistemology, and truth.
Metaphysics. As a theistic faith, Islam generally holds a similar view of reality to Christi-
anity. It is nonnaturalist, since it affirms the reality of both the natural and the supernatural,
the material and the immaterial. Islam also affirms that God created the universe ex nihilo
as an act of his will, and that while God remains separate from creation, he actively sustains
it and reveals himself in it. God, in Islam, is viewed as a necessary being who could not not
exist. Muslim philosophers throughout history have offered a variety of arguments in de-
fense of these ideas.64 Al-Ghazali, in particular, is famous for articulating an early version
of the kalam cosmological argument. It may be set out simply as follows: whatever began to
exist has a cause for its coming into being; the universe began to exist; therefore, the universe
has a cause for coming into being." It was, however, the conviction that the universe was
created ex nihilo that led to the greatest problems in reconciling Aristotle's thought to Islamic
theology. Aristotle taught that the universe has always
Muslim metaphysics
diverges from Christian
metaphysics in its view of
God's nature.
existed as a simultaneous and necessary effect of God's
perfect existence. If this is so, God is not creator in the
way both Christians and Muslims understand him to be.
Muslim metaphysics diverges from Christian meta-
physics in its view of God's nature. Islam clearly rejects
the concept of a personal Trinitarian God, instead view-
ing God as an impersonal, absolute unity. This idea of divine unity-tawhid in Arabic-is the
preeminent concept in Islam. In Islam, one cannot have a "personal relationship" with God,
since that implies some sort of change or movement in God.
Epistemology. Traditional Sunni Islam has a two-tier theory of knowledge. The top tier
is the knowledge that comes through special revelation from God-primarily in the form
of prophecy in the Quran and the example of Muhammad as described in the Hadith. This
sort of knowledge is authoritative, providing a framework for understanding everything else.
The second tier consists of all other sorts of human knowledge, such as scientific discovery
experiences through the human senses, and knowledge of other persons. These types or
knowledge are regarded as fallible. They may be held to be provisionally true, but they must be
understood within, and assessed by, the knowledge provided by special revelation 66 Muslims
Presuppose this framework to be valid. They do not feel the need to justify it; justification is
needed only for beliefs adopted through the second tier of knowledge.
Because Muslims presuppose their version or special revelation to be true and not open
to questioning, they have a hard time dialoging with people who believe differently. So, for
example, how do Muslims know that their beliet that the Quran is the true word of God is
warranted? And how can this belief not need justication when genuine alternatives exist-
like the Bible? This approach to epistemology also reveals the problem for philosophy as a
discipline within a Muslim worldview. The tramework is essentially theological. Philosophy
must take a backseat; it has no authority to challenge the assumptions and presuppositions
of theology.
Not all Muslims agree with this framework. Sufism, the mystical tradition of Islam, has
a radically different approach to knowledge. Sufis say God can be known through personal
experience. Moreover, the Mutazilites were an example of a rationalist approach to epistemol-
ogy that is, they were looking for a way to demonstrate that Islamic presuppositions were
objectively true). Some Muslim philosophers today (particularly in Turkey) are seeking to
revive something of this sort of analytical approach to epistemology.
Mind/body problem. Muslim theology does not have a history of wrestling with the mind/
body problem to any great degree. Muslims seem to hold a similar view to Christians, that the
soul is immaterial and immortal but nevertheless properly resides in a physical body. Surah
91:9-10 talks about God forming the soul and says, "The one who purifies his soul succeeds
and the one who corrupts it fails." Muslim philosophy records Ibn Sina, in particular, writing
at length about the human soul. Again, however, his very sophisticated (and complicated)
account is a dubious attempt to reconcile Aristotle's (essentially) nondualist account of the
human soul with orthodox Islamic theology.68
7. CHRISTIANITY
Historically, Christianity and philosophy have been close friends. Francis Bacon famously
said, "A little philosophy inclines man's mind to atheism, but depth in philosophy brings
mens minds about to religion? In the very order of creation, God made it possible for us to
observe something of his revelation and to recognize our observations as meaningful. Other
creatures know things, in a manner of speaking, but humans know that we know. We have
a capacity to contemplate what our knowing Revealer
shows us. Christian philosophy says that what we can
know is actually there-reality actually exists for us to
know, that we can train ourselves to know things because
they actually exist. This is called realism.
Realism: the belief that
an objective reality exists
independent of human
perception or language.
Because it requires faith in special revelation
through the Bible, you might assume that Christianity
cannot possibly have a coherent philosophy of its own.
Secularism and Marxism point to naturalism and materialism as being grounded firmly in
modern scientific methodology and enlightened human experience. What kind of truth can
Christians point to that is similarly well grounded? Isn't it simply a matter of reason versus faith
Actually, the battle of ideas isn't reason versus faith but faith versus faith, and the faith of
Secularism and Marxism is ailing. Even within the last few decades, the materialist explana
tion of existence has become untenable to many of the world's top philosophers, especiall


<!-- page-10 (book p.217) -->

regardine the mind/body problem. Furthermore, noted atheist philosopher Thomas Nagel
believes that the only solution will be a "major conceptual revolution at least as radical as
[Einstein's] relativity theory. Hoping for a revolution is not an appeal to reason. It is an
expression of faith, a longing for a materialist or naturalist savior.
This is not to say that faith is bad. Faith precedes reason, or as W. . Neidhardt put it,
"Faith correctly viewed is that illumination by which true rationality begins"" In other words,
every worldview begins with basic assumptions about
the nature of reality, which, merely by using the scientific
To have philosophical
integrity, we must base
our case on truthful
assumptions and the best
evidence available.
method or logical deduction, cannot be proved.
Nor does faith replace the need for careful thinking.
To have philosophical integrity, we must base our case
on truthful assumptions and the best evidence avail-
able. Christian philosophers reject neither reason nor
tests for truth; rather, they embrace them. The apostle
Paul, for instance, when writing of Jesus's resurrection, mentioned Jesus's postresurrection
appearance to an audience of five hundred men (1 Cor. 15:3-6).2 William Lillie, the former
chair of biblical studies at the University of Aberdeen said,
What gives a special authority to the list as historical evidence is the reference to most
of the five hundred brethren being still alive. St. Paul says in effect, "If you do not be-
lieve me, you can ask them. Such a statement in an admittedly genuine letter written
within thirty years of the event is almost as strong evidence as one could hope to get
for something that happened nearly two thousand years ago?
Scripture offers itself up to reason to test for truth.
Scripture offers itself up
to reason to test for truth.
Christians do not ask
nonbelievers to blindly
leap into what cannot be
known but to consider
historical evidence
alongside spiritual claims.
Christians do not ask nonbelievers to blindly leap into
what cannot be known but to consider historical evi-
dence alongside spiritual claims.
So from this view, faith precedes reason-in order
to understand we must first believe?* Secularists and
Marxists believe mind evolved out of matter. Christians
believe mind existed first-the mind of God. John 1:1
savs. "In the beginning was the Word" The word for
"Word" is Logos, which, as we discussed earlier, refers
to both mind and word. We might say logos is "a thought expressed" God thought up the
universe and then expressed it into existence. Warren C. Young explained it this way:
Christian realists are contingent dualists but not eternal dualists. They hold that there
are two kinds of substance: Spirit (or God) and matter which was created by God ex
nihilo as Augustine suggested. Matter is not spirit, nor is it reducible to spirit, but its
existence is always dependent upon God Who created it out of nothing.?
Young described the Christian view as Christian realism 76 More recentlv some have
employed the term substance dualism: each person has, in the words of Douglas Groothuis
"a material nature (explicable in terms of physics, chemistry and biology) and an immaterial
nature (which interacts with but also transcends material states)"
There are many philosophical terms we could choose for our one-phrase summary of
aristian philosophy. In an effort to stress the existence of something other than the ma-
terial, though, we employ the term dualism to describe the idea that both the material and
immaterial exist.
Epistemology. Christianity says we can know things because their order has been made
sensible through Jesus Christ, the incarnation of the Logos. But surely Christianity still runs
into an epistemological problem: How does the Christian "know" aside from science and
experience? How can the knowledge we gain through faith in biblical revelation compare to
knowledge gained by careful, logical investigation?
Secularists and Marxists portray science as a superior form of knowing that trumps bib-
lical revelation, which they regard as superstitious. But what they fail to grasp is that faith in
science is still faith. Edward T. Ramsdell wrote,
"The natural man is no less certainly a man
offaith than the spiritual, but his faith is in the ultimacy of something other than the Word of
God. The spiritual man is no less certainly a man of reason than the natural, but his reason,
like that of every man, functions within the perspective of his faith."78
The basic problem of philosophy is not the problem of faith versus reason. "The crucial
problem," said Warren C. Young, "is that some thinkers place their trust in a set of assump-
tions in their search for truth, while other thinkers place their trust in a quite different set of
assumptions"79 Secularists and Marxists place their trust in certain findings of science and
experience, neither of which can be rationally demonstrated as the exclusive source of all
truth. If you wish to test whether this is so, when someone says, "I only believe what I can
prove using the scientific method," respond with this question: "Can you prove that belief
using the scientific method?" The believer in scientific empiricism claims to know at least
one thing science itself cannot deliver or prove.
Christians also appeal to science, history, and personal experience, but they know such
avenues for discovering truth are not infallible. Scientists can make mistakes. Historians can
twist the truth. Personal experience can be "reimagined" so we see only what we want to.
Naturalists dismiss supernaturalism, Young pointed out, "without seeming to be at all troubled
by the fact that [in so doing they are making] an emotional rather than a logical conclusion
So far, we have established two things regarding Christian philosophy: it is not irrational,
and its asumptions require no more faith than any other philosophy. But this is just the
beginning As we will see the positive case for Christian philosophy is quite strong. Let's dig
in and see how.
Metaphysics. What is real? Earlier we quoted John 1:1. But let's expand a bit:
In the beginning lof the cosmos] was the Word [Logos: mind, reason, thought, wis-
dom, intelligence, idea, law), and the Word was with God, and the Word was God.
The same [Word] was in the beginning with God. All things were made by him; and
without him was not any thing made that was made. In him was life; and the life was
the light of men. (John 1:1-4 KJV)
The flow of this passage sets the parameters of a Christian metaphysics-mind before
matter; God before people; plan and design before creation; life from life; and enlightenmen
from the Light. The orderly universe was conceived first in the mind of God. Without the


<!-- page-11 -->

Logos there would be no cosmos. Poetry, philosophy,
Without the Logos there
would be no cosmos.
art, and literature describing order, design, and beauty
make perfect sense to the Christian.
The Christian is not surprised to find every level of
the cosmos-subatomic, atomic, organic, inorganic, subhuman, human, earth, moon, sun,
stars, galaxies - manifesting a surprising order, rationality, and consistency that reflects design.
The Christian view of metaphysics, the nature of reality, is an example of what C. S. Lewis
termed "mere Christianity" —something about which all Christians agree. It would be an
inherent contradiction for someone to claim to be a Christian and yet refuse to acknowledge
the creator-God for the universes actuality, meaning,
and purpose. Creation is intelligible because God is
Creation is intelligible
because God is intelligent.
intelligent. We can understand the creation and Creator
because he made us in his image with the capacity to
understand him and his intelligent order.
Mind/body problem. The nonnaturalist maintains that mind, or consciousness, is not
reducible to the material (or physical) body (or brain). Christians believe the powers of the
mind are a reflection of the image of God. For this reason, Christians see the nature of the
mind as evidence for the existence of the nonnatural reality. As philosopher J. P. Moreland
notes, naturalism cannot account for consciousness and mental events; theism can. The view
that the human being consists of two sorts of things-
material and immaterial—is sometimes called mind/
Mind/Body Dualism:
the belief that human
beings are composed of
immaterial minds and
material bodies.
One argument for mind/body dualism is our per-
ception that our thinking is something different from
the material world. Young said, "Man is so made that his
spirit may operate upon and influence his body, and his
body is so made that it may operate upon his mind or
spirie The distinction between brain and mind implies a distinction about the whole order of
things: matter exists (eg, the brain), and something other than matter exists (e.g., the mind).
Minds seem to be real things that go beyond mere brain function. More than fifty years
ago, James Oliver Buswell wrote, "The mind is not the brain. The brain track psychology has
failed... It is a known fact that if certain parts of the brain are destroyed, and the functions
corresponding to those parts impaired, the functions may be taken up by other parts of the
brain. There is no exact correspondence between mind and brain? New research affirms
Buswells point. Neuroscientist Mario Beauregard goes even further, claiming in The Spiritual
Brain that what he calls " nonmaterialism" is actually a useful theory that can help solve actual.
medical problems, such as obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD).3
A second argument for mind/body dualism is the clear distinction between mental events
and physical (or material) events. Sir John Eccles has made a voluminous contribution t
this discussion. His three works, The Self and Its Brain (with Karl Popper), The Human Mys-
tery, and The Human Psyche are considered classics in the field. It was the position of Eccles
whose work was in medicine, not theology, that having a mind means one is conscious, and
that consciousness is a mental state, not a material state. The thought I love my mom is not
identical to the electrical impulse in my brain that occurs when I have this thought. He further
contends that there are two distinct orders; that is, the brain is in the material world, and the
mind is in the "world of subjective experience"86
We humans have a sense of mindfulness; we intuitively recognize that mental experiences
are necessary to understand the physical world but yet are not part of the physical world it-
self. Not only are we aware of our minds and those of others, but it is only with minds that
we can understand, conceptualize, investigate, ponder,
and reflect upon the deep structure of the material uni-
verse. All of this implies the existence of a God powerful
enough to structure his creation with mind as an integral
part. Consequently, once one grants the existence of
an immaterial mind not reducible to anything in the
physical universe, belief in the Ultimate Mind seems
like the only rational option.
We have barely scratched the surface here. There
We humans have a sense
of mindfulness; we
intuitively recognize that
mental experiences are
necessary to understand
the physical world
but yet are not part of
the physical world itself.
is so much exciting research and thinking going on in
philosophy and science about the relationship between
mind and brain, it will take a lifetime of effort to keep up with it all. Remember, though,
that God is much more than an ultimate mind. The mental proof may help to establish the
existence of God, but the God of rational proofs alone is unworthy of worship. Only the
Christian God, in all his power and holiness, elicits awe and love in their proper proportion.
Christian philosophy embraces the meaningful, purposeful life shaped according to a
coherent, reasonable, truthful worldview. Christians with such a worldview will not be tossed
to and fro by every counterfeit worldview. Warren Young said, "It is the task of the Christian
leader to understand the ideologies of his day so that he may be able to meet their challenges.
The task is a never-ending one, for, although the Christian's worldview does not change, the
world about him does. Thus the task... requires eternal vigilance"s
The Christian worldview is consistent with the revelation of nature and the special reve-
lation of the Bible. Materialism, naturalism, anti-realism, monism, dualism- they cannot all
betrue. To be wisdom's companion means to choose wisely, knowing the choice affects every
other aspect of life. Making good choices- choices that enable us to flourish and encourage
the flourishing of others—is what people think about in a field related to philosophy called
ethics. It is such an important area that we have devoted an entire chapter to it. Thats what
well cover next.
ENDNOTES
before the birth of Christ.
1. Chuangzi was a Chinese philosopher writing at about the same time as Aristotle in Greece, three hundred years
2. This question is often attributed to the philosopher George Berkeley (1685-1753). Although he did not actuall
raise this question in those precise words, the philosophy he defended, idealism, requires that one believe tha
things exist only insofar as one perceives them. Because God perceives everything, reasoned Berkeley, the universe
exists even when we don't perceive it. So, if a tree falls in a forest, and no one is there, It does make a sound because


<!-- page-12 -->

3. Luke 10:27: "[esus) answered, You shall love the Lord your God with all your neart and with du your soul and with
all your strength and with all your mind, and your neighbor as yourself.
4. There are other sorts of monists, such as New Spiritualists, who believe everything is, at heart, immaterial.
5. Clinical psychiatrist Daniel Siegel says the mind is an "embodied and relational process that regulates the flow
of energy and information." Two main positions have emerged on the mind/body problem. Mind/body monism
contends that the body and mind are both purely material substances-the brain is the mind and the mind is the
brain. Mind/body dualism says the mind is an activity, not a thing, and while the mind is somehow resident in the
brain, its functions cannot be explained as purely physical. Deepak Chopra and Leonard Mlodinow, War of the
Worldviews (New York: Three Rivers, 2011), 232-33.
6. Paul Amos Moody states, "The more I study science the more 1 am impressed with the thought that this world
and universe have a definite design-and a design suggests a designer. It may be possible to have design without
a designer, a picture without an artist, but my mind is unable to conceive of such a situation." Paul Amos Moody,
Introduction to Evolution (New York: Harper and Row, 1970), 497; see also, William A. Dembski, The Design Inference:
Eliminating Chance through Small Probabilities (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1999). High school students
will enjoy observing The Privileged Planet documentary, distributed by Illustra Media at www.illustramedia.com. For
a slightly different, though Christian, perspective, see Brad S. Gregory, 'Science versus Religion? The Insights and
Oversights of the New Atheists," Logos 12, no. 4(2009): 17-55; Alvin Plantinga, Where the Conflict Really Lies: Science,
Religion, and Naturalism (New York: Oxford University Press, 2012).
7. Quoted in Roger E. Greeley, ed., The Best of Humanism (Buffalo, NY: Prometheus Books, 1988), 149.
8. Susan Jacoby, The Age of American Unreason (New York: Vintage, 2008), 27.
9. Greeley, Best of Humanism, 149.
10. Carl Sagan, Cosmos (New York: Random House, 1980), 4. For an in-depth look at how Sagan fared in his
confrontation with Immanuel Velikovsky, see Charles Ginenthal, Carl Sagan and Immanuel Velikousky (Tempe, AZ: New
Falcon, 1995).
11. Robert E. Greeley, ed., The Best of Robert Ingersoll: Immortal Infidel (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1983), 27.
12. Roy Wood Sellars, Evolutionary Naturalism (Chicago: Open Court, 1922), 5.
13. Carl Sagan, UFO's: A Scientific Debate (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1972), xiv.
14. Richard Posner, The Problem of Jurisprudence (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1990), 228-29.
15. Morris B. Storer, ed., Humanist Ethics (Buffalo, NY: Prometheus Books, 1979), 137.
16. Corliss Lamont, Voice in the Wilderness (Buffalo, NY: Prometheus Books, 1975), 82.
17. Edwin Arthur Burtt, Types of Religious Philosophy (New York: Harper and Brothers, 1939), 353. Clearly, the Humanist
has no patience with the anthropic principle, which contends that the world was tailored for humankind's existence.
For an excellent defense of this principle, see Roy Abraham Varghese, ed., The Intellectuals Speak Out about God (Dallas:
Lewis and Stanley, 1984), 102.
18. Quoted in Greeley, Best of Humanism, 154.
19. Rodney Stark, For the Glory of God: How Monotheism Led to Reformations, Science, Witch-hunts, and the End of Slavery
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2003).
20. Quoted in Greeley, Best of Humanism, 15.
21. Quoted in Joseph Stalin, Dialectical and Historical Materialism (New York: International Publishers, 1977), 15.
22. V. I. Lenin, Materialism and Empirio-Criticism (New York: International Publishers, 1927), 21.
23. Lenin, Materialism and Empirio-Criticism, 145.
24. See Delos Mckown's discussion in The Classical Marxist Critiques of Religion: Marx, Engels, Lenin, Kautsky (The Hague:
Martinus Nijhoff, 1975), specifically the chapter on "Lenin's Critique of Religion."
25. Lenin, Materialism and Empirio-Criticism, 252.
26. Lenin, Materialism and Empirio-Criticism, 81.
27. Lenin, Materialism and Empirio-Criticism, 102.
28. Alexander Spirkin, Dialectics and Materialism (Moscow: Progress Publishers, 1983), 66.
29. Frederick Engels, Dialectics of Nature (New York: International Publishers, 1976), 337,
30. Gustav A, Wetter stated, "In Hegel's sense of the term, dialectic is a process in which a starting point la thesis,
e.g., Being) is negated [the antithesis, e.g., Non-Being], thereby setting up a second position opposed to it. Thi
second position is in turn negated, i.e., by negation of the negation, so as to reach a third position representin
a metress veg. Becoming) of the two preceding, in which both are to ascended, fe, abolished and at the same
time preserved on a higher level of being. This third phase then figures in turn as the first step in a new dialectic
process li.e., a new thesis), leading to a new synthesis, and so on." Gustav A. Wetter, Dialectical Materialism (Westport,
CT: Greenwood Press, 1977), 4.
31. When the dialectic is combined with materialism, which says that only the world of matter exists, you have a
explanation of reality that actually has mystical attributes, according to Gustav Wetter, a Catholic priest and expe
on Marxist philosophy; "In dialectical materialism... the higher is not, as such, denied; the world is interprete
as a process of continual ascent, which fundamentally extends into infinity. But it is supposed to be matter itself
which continually attains to higher perfection under its own power, thanks to its indwelling dialectic. As Nikolai
Berdyaev very rightly remarks, the dialectical materialist attribution of dialectic' to matter confers on it, not menta
attributes only, but even divine ones." Wetter, Dialectical Materialism, 558.
32. Maurice Conforth, The Theory of Knowledge (New York: International Publishers, 1963), 22.
33. Karl Marx, Capital, vol. 1, A Critical Analysis of Capitalist Production (London: Progress Publishers, 189).
34. Lenin, Materialism and Empirio-Criticism, 66.
35. Nancy Pearcey, Total Truth: Liberating Christianity from Its Cultural Captivity (Wheaton, IL: Crossway Books, 2004),
107, 113.
36. Myron B. Penner, ed., Christianity and the Postmodern Turn (Grand Rapids: Brazos, 2005), 210.
37, John Perry, Michael Bratman, and John Martin Fischer, Introduction to Philosophy (New York: Oxford University
Press, 2010).
38. Michel Foucault, This Is Not a Pipe (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1983), 9, 49.
39. Ronald Hamowy, ed., The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 2008), s.v. "Diderot, Denis
(1713-1784)."
40. For background material on Nietzsche, see Arthur Herman, The Idea of Decline in Western History (New York:
Free Press, 1997); Will Durant, The Story of Philosophy (New York: Pocket Books, 2006); and John P. Koster, The Atheist
Syndrome (Brentwood, TN: Wolgemuth and Hyatt, 1989).
41. Quoted in Penner, Christianity and the Postmodern Turn, 78.
42. See Jean Baudrillard, The Gulf War Did Not Take Place, trans. Paul Patton (Bloomington, IN: Indiana University
Press, 1995).
43. Glenn Ward, Teach Yourself Postmodernism, 2nd ed. (Chicago: McGraw-Hill, 2003), 77. For a systematic analysis
and critique of Postmodernism, we recommend Christopher Norris, The Truth about Postmodernism (Oxford, UK:
Blackwell, 1996).
44. As we have acknowledged, there are Christian Postmodernists who accept God and believe many aspects of Christian
doctrine. For examples of Christian Postmodernism, see Nancey Murphy, Beyond Liberalism and Fundamentalism, and
Anglo-American Postmodernity; James K. A. Smith, Who's Afraid of Postmodernism?; Alasdair MacIntyre, After Virtue, and
Whose Justice? Which Rationality?; and Stanley Grenz and John Franke, Beyond Foundationalism. Stanley Hauerwas is also
an important figure who has written many books. For books responding to Christian Postmodernism, see Doug
Groothuis, Truth Decay; Kevin DeYoung, Why We're Not Emergent-By Two Guys Who Ought to Be; R. Scott Smith, Truth and
the New Kind of Christian: The Emerging Effects of Postmodernism in the Church, and Naturalism and Our Knowledge of Reality:
Testing Religious Truth-Claims.
45. To correctly understand the meaning of any text of Scripture, we should heed Paul's advice to Timothy: "Do your
best to present yourself to God as one approved, a workman who does not need to be ashamed and who correctiy
handles the word of truth" (2 Tim. 2:15). By acknowledging that God has communicated in language Truth about the
real world, and by diligently studying the Bible, you can know the Truth that sets you free (John 8:32).
46. Romans 12:4: "As in one body we have many members, and the members do not all have the same function."
47. Joseph Campbell, The Power of Myth (New York: Doubleday, 1988), 49. One is tempted to reply, "So either God
thinks in terms of opposites or he doesn't," and "That is all there is to it... as opposed to something more?" 's hard
to make any claims about reality without resorting to the claim that our propositions stand opposed to what reality
might otherwise be described as being.
48. Neale Donald Walsch, The New Revelations: A Conversation with God (New York: Atria Books, 2002), 360.
49. See Ken Wilber, A Brief History of Everything (Boston: Shambhala, 2001); see also Douglas Groothuls s related review
of Wilber's book A Theory of Everything in "A Summary Critique: Nothing Much about Everything," Christian Researc
Joural 23, no. 4(2001) at www.equip.org/PDF/DW258.pdf.
20. Dean C. Halverson, Crystal Clear: Understanding and Reaching New Agers (Colorado Springs: NavPress, 1990), .
5l. Robert Muller, The New Genesis: Shaping a Global Spirituality (New York: Image Books, 1984), 189
52. David Spangler, Emergence: The Rebirth of the Sacred (New York: Dell, 1984), 12,
53. Stephen Schwartz, "Colors of the Wind, Pocahontas ®1995 Walt Disney/Mercury,
5t. Priof Capra, The Turning Point (Toronto: Bantam Books, 1982), 77-78.
35. Shakti Gawain, Living in the Light (San Rafael: New World Library, 1986), 69.
56. Campbell, Power of Myth, 6.
. Marilyn Ferguson, The Aquarian Conspiracy (Los Angeles: ). P. archer, o, 303.
58. The Dalal Lama, A Profound Mind (New York: Three Rivers, 20), 101.
59, Marianne Williamson, A Return to Love: Reflections on the Principles of "A Course in Miracles" (New York: HarperCollin


<!-- page-13 -->

so. Oliver Leaman, An Introduction to Classical Islamic Philosophy (Camorage, Un: Campriage University Press, 2002)
3. Also see Mir Valiuddin, "Mu'tazilism: A General Mu'tazilite Position," in M. M. Sharif, ed., A history of Muslin
Philosophy (islamic Philosophy Online, 196), accessed March 26, 2014, www.muslimphilosophy.com/hmp/13.htm.
61. Those interested in a fuller treatment of Islamic philosophy can consult Oliver Leaman, An Introduction to
Classical Islamic Philosophy. The most comprehensive online resource for those wanting to go deeper, or to read
the classical Muslim philosophers writing firsthand, is Islamic Philosophy Online: Philosophia Islamica, www.
muslimphilosophy.com. We also recommend Gordon H. Clark, Thales to Dewey: A History of Philosophy (Grand
Rapids: Baker, 1980), 265.
62. According to Richard Shumack, a research fellow at the Centre for Public Christianity in Australia, with a PhD
in İslamic studies (University of Melbourne), Turkish philosophers have developed their philosophy largely along
analytical-rationalist lines (the idea that truths are knowable through reason. Prominent Turkish philosophers
include loanna Kucuradi, Arda Denkel (1949-2000), and Cemal Yildirim (1925-2009). In Iran, philosophy has
developed more along postmodern and anti realist lines (philosophical approaches that begin with the assumption
that ultimate reality cannot be reduced to statements we can know to be true or false. The most famous Iranian
philosopher is probably Abdolkarim Soroush. Iranian philosophical journals include Falsafeh: The Iranian Journal of
Philosophy and Hekmat va Falsafeh.
63. See the discussion in Fazlur Rahman, Islam, 2nd ed. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1979), 117-27.
64. Natural theological arguments are usually seen to be of three sorts: ontological arguments that argue that the
very concept of God is logically necessary in some way; cosmological arguments that argue that the existence of the
universe is best explained by a divine first cause; and teleological arguments that argue that the intricacy and order
of the universe demands a divine designer.
65. For all things al-Ghazali, including his major works, see www.ghazali.org. Note that many works are not yet
translated into English.
66. An example of an influential contemporary Muslim philosopher arguing along these lines is Ismail al-Farugi.
See Ismail Raji al-Farugi, Ismail Faruqi Online, accessed March 26, 2014, www.ismailfaruqi.com.
67. What happens to the soul upon death, in Islamic teaching, is the subject of the work of Abdulaziz Sachedina, a
religion professor at the University of Virginia. In his article "Brain Death in Islamic Jurisprudence," http: //people.
virginia.edu/~aas/article/article 6.htm, Sachedina says, "Death is the termination of an individual comprehensive
being, capable of believing and disbelieving, and not simply a living organism. Even though later orthodox Islam
came to accept the mind-body dualism, the Quran by using the term nafs seems to be rejecting the idea that some
entity, like the soul, leaves the body at the time of death. Life does not end with death. In the same way that a person
does not cease to exist in sleep, so also he does not cease to exist in death. And in the same way that a person comes
back to life when walking from sleep, so also will he be revived at the great awakening on the Day of Judgment.
Hence, Islam views death merely as a stage in human existence."
68. Muhammad Ali Khalidi, ed., Medieval Islamic Philosophical Writings (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press,
2005), xix.
69. Hugh G. Dick, ed., Select Writings of Francis Bacon (New York: Random House, 1955), 44.
70. Thomas Nagel, Mind and Cosmos (New York: Oxford University Press, 2012), 42.
71. W. J. Neichardt, "Faith, the Unrecognized Partner of Science and Religion, Journal of the American Scientific Aflation
26, no. 3 (September 1974): 89-95, www.asa3.org/ASA/PSCF/1974/JASA9-74Neidhardt.html.
72. First Corinthians 15:3-6: "I delivered to you as of first importance what I also received: that Christ died for our
sins in accordance with the Scriptures, that he was buried, that he was raised on the third day in accordance with
the Scriptures, and that he appeared to Cephas, then to the twelve. Then he appeared to more than five hundred
brothers at one time, most of whom are still alive, though some have fallen asleep."
73. See Edwin M. Yamauchi, "Easter: Myth, Hallucination, or History?," accessed March 26, 2014, http://www
leaderu.com/everystudent/easter/articles/yama.html. The quotation from William Lille is found in "The Empty
Tomb and the Resurrection," in D. E. Nineham et al., Historicity and Chronology in the New Testament (London: SPCK,
74. "I believe, therefore 1 understand" is often characterized as the "Augustinian view." "I understand, therefore I
believe" is, contrarily, characterized as the view of Thomas Aquinas. Fo2), variety of reasons, we are more compelled
by the Augustinian view and believe it is more consisteda ue jou sical revelation, especially the teachings of the
apostlera. Theologian Norman Geister has examined both views, and hisbooks can serve as a helpful introduction.
se Norman Geisler, Thomas Aquinas: An Evangelical Appraisal (Eugene, OR: Wipf and Stock, 2003), and What Augustine
Says (Eugene, OR: Wipf and Stock, 2003). If you've never reI. anything on Aquinas, you might want to start with G.
.. Chesterton's brief study called Saint Thomas Agana: The Dumb Ox (New York: Doubleday, 1956). The term dumb ox
up leading a revolution in Christian thought.
is not an epithet but an ironic reference to the fact that Agunny aut 44l a "dumb ox" by his classmates but endea
75. Warren C. Young, A Christian Approach to Philosophy (Grand Rapids: Baker, 1975), 37.
6. Young's perspective on Christianity and philosophy is clarified in a publicly available paper he delivered in 1958
idled "Is There a Christian Philosophy?" See Warren C. Young, "Is There a Christian Philosophy?," Bulletin of th
Evangelical Theological Society 1, no. 4 (Fall 1958): 6-14, www.biblicalstudies.org.uk/pdf/bets/vol01/philosophy_youn
T. Douglas Grothuis, Christian Apologetics (Downers Grove, IL: Inter Varsity, 201, 389-90.
78. Edward T. Ramsdell, The Christian Perspective (New York: Abingdon-Cokesbury, 1950), 42.
79. Young, Christian Approach, 37.
80. Young, Christian Approach, 182.
81. Henry, God, Revelation, and Authority, 5:336.
82. 1 P. Moreland, "The Argument from Consciousness, in Wiliam Lane Craig and J. P. Moreland, The Blackwell
Companion to Natural Theology (Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell, 2012), 296.
83. Young, Christian Approach, 120.
84. James Oliver Buswell Jr., A Christian View of Being and Knowing (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1960), 142.
85. See especially chapter 6 in Mario Beauregard and Denise O'Leary, The Spiritual Brain (New York: HarperOne,
2007).
86. John C. Eccles, Evolution of the Brain: Creation of the Self (New York: Routledge, 1991), 75.
87. "How can nature include mind as an integral part unless it is grounded in mind? If mind were seen as something
alien or accidental, the case would be different, but the further we go in modern science the clearer it becomes that
mental experience is no strange offshoot. Rather it is something which is deeply rooted in the entire structure." D.
Elton Trueblood, Philosophy of Religion (Grand Rapids: Baker, 1957), 206.
88. Young, Christian Approach, 228-29. See also Ronald H. Nash, Life's Ultimate Questions: An Introduction to Philosophy
(Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1999); J. P. Moreland and William Lane Craig, Philosophical Foundations for a Christian
Worldview (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity, 2003); and Alvin Plantinga, Warranted Christian Belief (Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press, 2000).
