# Chapter 13

<!-- page-1 (book p.13) -->

CHAPTER
¡i¡
1. IN THE MIDST OF A SEISMIC SHIFT
With a national population of thirteen million (roughly
equivalent to present-day Illinois, America in the 1830s had
a lot more elbow room. The War of Independence was still
fresh in the national memory, and many of its veterans were
still alive. Andrew Jackson presided over a rapidly growing
economy. The country's mood, according to Thomas Low
Nichols, was optimistic:
We had no doubt that ours was the freest, most en-
lightened, and happiest country, in the world. We
knew that where there was a will there was a way, and
our teachers constantly stimulated us by the glitter-
ing prizes of wealth, honors, offices, and distinctions
Which were certainly within our reach... There were
a hundred avenues to wealth and fame opening fair
before us, if we only chose to learn our lessons. Of
course we learnt them.!


<!-- page-2 (book p.309) -->

French sociologist Alexis de Tocqueville visited America during this time and recorded
nis observations in Democracy in America. De Tocqueville was impressed but sober: strong
societies often collapse it people lose th epoto maintain them. In one particularly prophetic
passage, he wrote,
Because Roman civilization perished through barbarian invasions, we are perhaps
too much inclined to think that that is the only way a civilization can die. If the lights
that guide us ever go out, they will fade little by little, as if of their own accord... We
therefore should not console ourselves by thinking that the barbarians are still a long
way off. Some peoples may let the torch be snatched from their hands, but others
stamp it out themselves?
For de Tocqueville, the choice was to earn the honor of future generations by standing
for truth and justice or to let history record that you lived in the greatest of times and did
nothing to preserve them.
Within three decades, de Tocqueville's prophecy began coming true. America's work
ethic led to an industrial boom that, in turn, reshaped society and brought to a fever pitch
the tensions between the industrialized north and agrarian south. The Union was preserved
and slavery abolished, and industrialization resumed at a frenzied pace with prosperity, con-
venience, and technological breakthroughs. But along
with these benefits came child labor, pollution, and un-
rest-just like England fifty years prior.
reshaped society and set
America on a path from
which, for better or worse,
it could never return.
The Industrial Revolution reshaped society and set
America on a path from which, for better or worse, it
could never return. How do we understand and live in
a world unlike anything humankind has experienced
before? Max Weber, based on his study of the Protestant
tradition, thought industrialization could be rationally organized and guided. Emile Durkheim
(the first person to call himself a sociologist) bemoaned the effect it had on individuals who
both unleashed it and were swept along by it. But it was Karl Marx's views of the Industrial
Revolution- that it was a sinister way for industrialists to enrich themselves at the expense
of workers-that had an earthshaking impact.
These three individuals - Marx, Weber, and Durkheim --by analyzing and proposing solu-
tions for the rapid changes in society that industrialization brought about, ended up forming
a brand new and very influential academic discipline called sociology. Socios is the Greek
word from which we get our word society. Whereas the
Sociology: the study of
human societies and
psychologist studies the individual and how he or she
relates to others, the sociologist studies the interactions
of individuals and society.
The social situation today makes this kind of study
hugely important. James Dobson and Gary Bauer ar-
gued in their book Children at R: strong Nothing short of a great Civil War of Values rages
today throughout North America possides with vastly differing and incompatible wor
dviews are locked in a bitter conflict that permeates every level of societv" The structure,
stability, and belief system of Americ are rapidly shifting, especially among the young:
• The percentage of students i entitying themselves as liberals has reached a forty-year
high: two out of three support sy me-sex marriage, and only one in four support mil-
itary spending.4
• The Millennials, those born Ictuween 1980 and 2001, have the lowest level of churc
attendance of any generation in American history
• Among those who do attend c ragtch in high school, only 30 percent maintain a similar
level of commitment in their twenties.
• One out of three young people lives in a home where no biological father is present?
Stable families make a stable society, but instability is now the norm.
• One out of four adolescents in the United States is currently at serious risk of not
achieving a productive adulthood (i.e., holding down a job, creating a stable family,
and making a positive contribution to the community).&
• Only one in twenty families engages in any spiritual training outside of church?
Societal change has the greatest effect on the most ideologically vulnerable: the young.
Sociologist Christian Smith says today's young adults are "more complex, disjointed, confused,
and unstable compared to the same ages in previous generations." This should concern us all.
Young adults may only be 15 percent of the population, but they are 100 percent of the future.
If we are to love God with all of our minds, we must gain a clear-eyed understanding of
the times. This will involve the careful study of society.
2. THE STUDY OF SOCIETY IS VITAL
Beginning with the work of Marx, Weber, and Durkheim, and continuing through scholars
like Charles Horton Cooley, Erving Goffman, Talcott Parsons, and George Herbert Mead,
the field of sociology has had to fight for academic respect. Many in the field itself still debate
whether sociology can accurately be described as a science, or whether it is even a good idea
to bring the scientific method to bear on social problems.
Every academic discipline makes certain assumptions about metaphysics (what is real and
epstemology (how we know). Like psychology, modern sociology operates under assumptions
that contradict the Christian worldview. For example, according to Steve Bruce, a chronicler
of sociology's history, sociology hangs on three threads: "Reality is socially constructed, our
behavior has hidden social camber, and much of social life is profoundly ironic." These are
code words. To say reality is "socially ticonstructed" is to say that no institutions of society,
such as the family, are ordained by God. To say our behavior has "hidden social causes" i
to say that society causes us to do what well-o; we aren't making choices but are responding
to external stimuli. And if social life is "profoundly ironic" (coincidental), then there is no
purpose or design in the world— only the illusion of meaning.
All three points assume materialism (only matter exists) and naturalism (all that happens
can be explained by natural causes and processes); there is no supernatural reality. We have
no ultimate purpose. This leads to a conflict for the Christian scholar. If sociology is truly
built on these three anti-Christian ashumptions, then Christian sociology is an oxymoron,


<!-- page-3 (book p.311) -->

like "untrue truth" or "married bachelor," which cannot exist without an unreasonable dis-
tortion of the terms employed.
And vet many sociologists have strong religious, even Christian, convictions. Pitirin
Sorokin. founder of the Harvard sociology department and an ardent foe of communism
was an Orthodox Christian. Some highly regarded sociologists of our day — Peter Berger,
namelv. as well as James Davidson Hunter and Christian Smith-claim a Christian faith.
How do we explain this?
Sociology is yet one more academic discipline where underlying assumptions confict. As
we examine the interaction between individuals and society- including origin, importance,
authority, and proper structures-should we regard certain philosophical assumptions, such
as "only nature exists" to be absolutely true? Secular, Marxist, and postmodern sociologists
say yes; New Spiritualists, Muslims, and Christians say no. Which perspective will lead to the
best work in sociology? To answer this question, we will explore each worldview's approach
as it seeks to understand individuals and society. We will focus mostly on family, marriage,
and child rearing, since political, legal, and economic structures will be considered in later
chapters.
3. SECULARISM
Perhaps, Victor thinks, a hike in the mountains will help. He hopes to relieve his heavy
agony-brought on by the destruction wrought by Victor's own creation. But he is sadly
mistaken. There on the icy slopes, Dr. Victor Frankenstein comes face-to-face with the su-
perhuman monster he brought to life and which has in turn killed those dearest to him.
Victor's revulsion is complete: "Abhorred monster" he cries out, "fiend that thou art! The
tortures of hell are too mild a vengeance for thy crimes."!2
Frankenstein's monster will have none of it. "I was benevolent and good; misery made
me a fiend. Make me happy, and again I shall be virtuous"3
Mary Shelley's story helps us understand the starting point of secular sociology: indi-
vidual selves who are free to do what makes them happy. This is called personal aufonomy.
Unfortunately, to secular sociologists, societv conspires against our vearning to be free to
do what we want, and this hurts hoth individuals and society "Essentially man is internally
motivated toward positive personal and social ends", say Robert Tannenbaum and Sheldon
A Davis. "The extent to which he is not motivated results from a process of demotivation
generated by his relationships and/or environment"4 According to the secular sociologist,
society constrains us—and society must set us free.!
When secular sociologists think of societal con-
straints against personal autonomy, their thoughts al-
Personal Autonomy:
the belief that individuals
should have the freedom
to decide what is right for
their own lies and live in
whatever manner brings
them the most happiness.
most always turn to the political realm. Those who enroll
in sociology classes are often caught off guard by their
professors advocacy of society-wide, and specifically
governmental, solutions to human problems. The na-
ture of the discipline is, says Patricia Hill Collins, "highly
political It is common to see "science" deployed as a
veneer to give credibility to the preordained, politically
correct solutions at which sociologists aim.'? As Secular Humanist historian Vern Bullough
admitted in reference to sexual politics, "Politics and science go hand in hand. In the end it
is gay activism which determines what researchers say about gay people "18
Seculariets often use sociology as a forward operating base from which they can take
political ground and simultaneously sally forth against ideas they find distasteful. According to
Christian Smith, sociology was conceived with two goals: to do away with religious influence
and to advance progressivism. Referring to two of its
founders, Auguste Comte and Herbert Spencer, Smith
says, "Both provided what proved to be key intellectual
tools utilized by rising academic elites seeking to displace
religious authority in order to make room for themselves
as new, secular cultural authorities."' Secular assump-
tions "provide the positive knowledge for a secular basis
Sociology was conceived
with two goals: to do
away with religious
influence and to advance
progressivism.
of a new and progressive social order."20
While Smith indicts sociology as being inherently anti-religious, others, like Christopher
Dawson, say that the dismissal of religious concerns was inevitable based on the way the spe-
cialized disciplines are organized." But in sociology's case, this is too charitable. If Smith is
correct, sociology is a pillow carefully embroidered to suffocate religious impulses while they
doze. According to Hunter Baker, Secularists view religion as properly irrelevant to public life:
Although the U.S. is one of the most religious of the developed nations, there is still
an expectation among those who define public reality in the media, academy, and
government that appeals to God should be saved for one's private life.... To swim
against the tide of secular modernity indicates one may be uncivil, unbalanced, and
possibly even dangerous."
In this view, religion is quaint and a little bit crazy, but essentially i's harmless until people
smuggle it into public life—at which time it becomes alarming.
Organizing sociology around secular principles does lead to some philosophical prob-
lems. For example, if only matter exists, then human "choices' aren't really choices at all - We
can do only what our genes and our environment make us do. This is called determinism.
One popular sociology textbook, written by Anthony Giddens and his colleagues, though,
positions sociology as a response to determinism:
There is a basic flaw in human reasoning that goes something like this: the things
that we see before us are inevitable. They are natural and cannot be changed. What
sociology teaches us is that in many ways we are freer than we think-that the things
that we think are natural are actually created by human beings.?3
One purpose of sociology, the authors say, is "to disentangle what is biological from what is
socially constructed "24 While Giddens and his colleagues express suspicion toward biological
determinism. thev acknowledge a sort of sociological determinism in which human actions
are "quite determined by our social roles, gender, race, and class"25 This makes it hard to tell
whether they are responding to determinism or expanding their definition of it in order to
explain the complexities of human behavior?


<!-- page-4 (book p.313) -->

Determinism, whether biological or sociological,
Biological Determinism:
the belief that our actions
are ultimately the result of
our genetic makeup.
leads to another philosophical dilemma on the ethi-
cal nature of human behavior. If human behavior is
determined, people cannot choose their actions. Thus,
nothing they do is either good or bad, nor is it done
out of an ethical impulse. There is no sin nature; people
merely do what they do. But this does not square with
Sociological Determinism:
the belief that our actions
are ultimately the result of
social conditions.
our experience; we know certain things are wrong even
before any courts of law weigh in. Sociologists acknowl-
edge that some people do things most of us do not like.
But instead of calling it sin, they use the term deviance,
which is defined as "nonconformity to a set of norms
that are accepted by a significant number of people in a
Deviance: behavior
or actions that violate
consensual social norms.
community or society."2
So there is no sin-just nonconformity. And yet
sociologists constantly express concern about things in
society they don't like, such as inequality between the
sexes and races. On what basis would they say these things are wrong? Telling a society to
stop providing unequal access to societal rewards is to tell them to do something sociology
declares impossible—to right a wrong by making an actual, conscious free choice. In a purely
materialistic and naturalistic world, people could no more choose to stand against inequality
than they could choose to run as fast as cheetahs or breathe through gill slits. They just don't
have the equipment, and that's all there is to it.
How, one might ask, can society be made up of sinless people and yet be filled with so
much sin? The sociologists response is to say that, once formed, society takes on a life of its
own and then forces us into living in certain ways that hurt us. Psychologist Erich Fromm
spoke of "the social process which creates man" and said, "Just as primitive man was helpless
before natural forces, modern man is helless before the social and economic forces created
by himself"3 Sane people create society, which goes insane and then drives everybody crazy.
What kinds of bad structures do good people create? Secular sociologists point mostly
to government and religion. With good intentions, people invent rules thev cannot live by
which in turn suffocate their freedom to grow as they naturally would. Walda Katz-Fishman
and George Benello declare that secular sociology "seeks the concrete betterment of human-
kind and is opposed to theories that seek either to glorify the status quo or to march human
beings lockstep into history in the interests of a vision imposed from above??!
"Religious institutions are the enemy." Where have you heard this before? In the secular
approach to every discipline we have examined so far, of course. If, Secularists say, society
tries to line up with the expectations of a nonexistent deity, then it will eventually disappoint
everyone. Deluded people driving a vehicle of fantasy will never arrive at the destination o
reality. This is a charge Christians and others mieht lav against Secularism as well but wel
get to that soon enough.
Secular sociologists are particularly critical of the biblical view of the family. Marriage,
they say, is exhihit number one of Christianity's failure to provide for human potential and
growth. To Lawrence Casler, a psychology professor whose academic study included observing
and interviewing nudists, "Marriage and family life have been largely responsible... for today's
prevailing neurotic climate, with its pervasive insecurity, and it is precisely this climate that
makes so difficult the acceptance of a different, healthier way of life "32 The idea of a man and
woman faithful to each other for life isn't all it is cracked up to be, Secularists hold Women
maintained, "The traditional family, with all its supposed
trade freedom for security, and what they get is slavery. As Syracuse "sexologist" Sol Gordon
attributes, enslaved woman; it reduced her to a breeder and
caretaker of children, a servant to her spouse, a cleaning
lady, and at times a victim of the labor market as well?'33
Secular sociologists have suggested numerous alter-
Secular sociologists are
particularly critical of the
biblical view of the family.
native lifestyles to replace the traditional family. Robert
N. Whitehurst, the late professor of sociology at the University of Windsor in Ontario, Can-
ada, advocated open marriage (i.e., open to adultery, triads, cooperatives, collectives, urban
communes, extended intimates, swinging and group marriage, and part-time marriage.* In
A New Bill of Sexual Rights and Responsibilities, sex educator Lester Kirkendall advocated all
of the above but also included something in his list called "genital associations," though no
one is quite sure what this means.35
Most people get suspicious at this point; it's one thing to tolerate aberrant sexuality but
quite another to make it appear to be normal or even good. In making the case for normalizing
what used to be seen as deviant, secular sociology has been considerably helped by popu-
lar-culture presentations of likable characters who embrace alternative lifestyles. For example,
the Gay and Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation (GLAAD) offers a series of awards to TV
shows that, in part, "[impact] society in a significant way? When choosing nominees, they
ask question like, "Does this project dramatically increase the cultural dialogue about LGBT
(lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender) issues? Or, does this project reach an audience that
is not regularly exposed to LGBT images and issues?*36
As we stated earlier, social experimentation ends up being most harmful for the most
vulnerable. In this case, the ones hurt are children. A raft of research demonstrates that sex-
ual experimentation on the part of parents is strongly
correlated to negative outcomes for the children, such as
crime and substance abuse, whereas the children most
likely to succeed as adults are those who grow up with a
mother and father? In spite of this, Casler envisioned a
society where children will be better off because every-
one in the family will be free from the norms that make
some people unhappy: "It is supposed that the principles
of ethical, productive, and happy living will be learned
more readily when children are free of the insecuritie.
engendered chiefly by parents, that ordinarily obstruct
the internalization of these modes of thought."38
Casler may truly believe this, but it's not because
A raft of research
demonstrates that sexual
experimentation on the
part of parents is strongly
correlated to negative
outcomes for the children,
such as crime and
substance abuse, whereas
the children most likely
to succeed as adults are
those who grow up with a
mother and father.
of evidence. When confronted with overwhelming


<!-- page-5 (book p.315) -->

locumentation to the contrary, secular sawogists Decome delensive. Advocating for tra-
ditional families is, in effect, a condemnation of all other families, which is harmful to children
who live in those families. This is an odd way of arguing. Would these professors tell their
students not to pay attention in class because serious study is, in effect, a condemnation of
less-studious students? We doubt it. They instead would encourage less-studious students
to study. So why don't these same scholars encourage people to enter traditional marriages,
maintain them, and raise good kids? As John Stonestreet points out, every worldview is
willing to sacrifice something on the altar of its convictions. If we are primarily animals, and
if the sexual impulse is the strongest impulse we have, then Secularism is willing to sacrifice
everything on the altar of sexual freedom: innocence, the safety of children, protection of the
unborn human; indeed, what it means to be human altogether.39
For Secularists, tradition is pathological; to return to the way society used to be makes
things worse, not better. Give us power to reorient society according to our ideology, Secu-
larists say, and we'll fix things right up. Erich Fromm, for example, quite openly bid for such
power. He defined the "sane society" as "that which corresponds to the needs of man-not
necessarily to what he feels to be his needs, because even the most pathological aims can be
felt subjectively as that which the person wants most; but to what his needs are objectively,
as they can be ascertained by the study of man."o We might be forgiven for reading this
statement as "We, the experts, will tell you what you need." If, based on materialism and nat-
uralism, secular sociologists were to do the telling, would things get better or worse? Secular
sociologists think they'd be better, and so they press ahead in that assumption.
4. MARXISM
According to the Marxist theoretician G. V. Plekhanov, Marxists ground their sociology
in what they consider to be the scientific foundation of "Darwinism in its application to
social science"*! Humanity is evolving both biologically and socially; as humanity improves,
so does society. Marxists fervently believe humanity's evolution will move them beyond
the misery-inducing capitalist structures of society. As we saw in the chapter on Marxism,
V. I. Lenin believed this evolution would even eliminate the need for government: "Only
in Communist society when the resistance of the capitalists has been completely broken,
when the capitalists have disappeared, when there are
Proletariat Society:
a socialist society shaped
by Communist Party
officials to promote the
values of the working class
over the bourgeoisie
no classes ... only then the State ceases to exist.
To the Marxists, a good society is a proletariat
society in which society becomes healthy by abandoning
capitalism and embracing the values of the workers,
which the Marxists see as more pure.
As mentioned earlier, Marx is widely considered to be
one of the founders of sociology. The other two founders,
Max Weber and Emile Durkheim, began their work after
Marx's death. Marx would probably have been suspicious of Weber and Durkheim because they
seemed to focus on making the best of industrialisms negative side effects. Marx didn't wan
to improve present conditions within the existing framework; he wanted instead to overthron
As you recall from our summary otion e worldview, Marxists believe that economic realities
this transforms everything else:
are at the root of everything. A time of economic revolution is inevitable, Marx believed, and
[At a certain stage of society the material productive forces of society come into
conflict with the existing relations of production... From forms of development of
the productive forces these relations turn into their fetters. Then begins an era of
social revolution. The changes in the economic foundation lead sooner or later to the
transformation of the whole immense superstructure.*3
In spite of some Marxists' suspicions of secular sociology, Marx did believe, as Secu-
larists do, that human beings are nothing more than what their societies make them: "The
mode of production of material life conditions the general process of social, political, and
intellectual life. It is not the consciousness of men that determines their existence but their
social existence that determines their consciousness."* Our material conditions, not our
aspirations, will determine what we become.45
Marxists see religion as a stumbling block hampering the development of the classless
society. In the quest for this utopian existence, the church makes things worse, not better.
Clemens Dutt summarizes the Marxist view:
The influence of the church promotes the schism of the [workers'] movement. Reac-
tionary churchmen everywhere try to isolate religious workers from their class brothers
by attracting them into separate organizations of a clerical nature ... and thus diverting
them from the struggle against capitalism.*
This explains why, in the former Soviet Union, Marxists aggressively sought to elimi-
nate the influence of the church. In the early days following the October Revolution, in an
effort to discourage anyone from joining the clergy, Marxists discriminated against priests.
When this failed to wipe out religion, Marxists tried to further restrict the church through
state controls. On April 8, 1929, for example, the USSR enacted a law forbidding religious
organizations from carrying out charitable activities or meeting at any time other than for
religious services. In effect, Marxist sociologists declared war against the church, a confict
that continues to the present dav wheluer communists are in power. When the final Soviel
leader, Mikhail Gorbachev, said that the communists had launched a "war on religion" he
correctly described the sentiments of not only Karl Marx but Marxist sociologists and a long
line of communists worldwide even today.8
Marxists also consider the traditional idea of the family to hinder progress because it is
seen as illicitly hoarding capital and wealth. According to Marxist revolutionary and novelist
Alexandra Kollontai, "The family deprives the worker
of revolutionary consciousness" and must, therefore, be
shunned. In The Communist Manifesto Marx wrote,
Marxists also consider
'The bourgeois family will vanish as a matter of course
the traditional idea of
when its complement vanishes, and both will vanish
the family to hinder
with the vanishing of capital." Furthermore, "The bour-
progress because it is
geois sees his wife lasl a mere instrument of production.
seen as illicitly hoarding
He hears that the instruments of production are to be
capital and wealth.


<!-- page-6 -->

exploited in common, and, naturally, can come to no other conclusion that the lot of being
common to all will likewise fall to the women."50
Once the proletariat is in power, Marxists believe, a new utopian society will develop a
higher form of family. No one is really sure what this higher form will look like, except for
one thing: there will be few sexual boundaries in it. Friedrich Engels seemed almost giddy
about this:
With the transfer of the means of production into common ownership, the single family
ceases to be the economic unit of society. Private housekeeping is transformed into a
social industry. The care and education of the children becomes a public affair; society
looks after all children alike, whether they are legitimate or not. This removes all the
anxiety about the consequences [of sex] which today is the most essential social-moral
as well as economic factor that prevents a girl from giving herself completely to the
man she loves. Will not that suffice to bring about the gradual growth of unconstrained
sexual intercourse and with it a more tolerant public opinion in regard to a maiden's
honor and a woman's shame?!
In this brave new world, men and women become sexually free because the abolition
of private property is supposed to free people from so-called moral restrictions that many
believe to actually be a form of economic oppression. Everyone belongs to everyone, and
that solves everything.
When asked, "What influence will the communist order of society have on the family?"
Engels answered,
It will make the relation between the sexes a purely private relation which concerns
only the persons involved, and in which society has no call to interfere. It is able
to do this because it abolishes private property and educates children communally,
thus destroying the twin foundations of hitherto existing marriage-the dependence
through private property of the wife upon the husband and of the children upon
The care of children also becomes a public affair in Marxist society. The "school becomes
literally a home" Alienating children from their parents keeps them from picking up their
parents lingering attachment to the old ways of living.
While the USSR no longer exists as such, the bloodshed it produced convinced most
of the world to view Marxs utopian schemes as tragedy rather than triumph. Some Marxist
evangelists, such as literature professor Terry Eagleton, shrug off this tragedy by blaming it
on bad Marxists rather than on Marxism itself.4 Marxism failed, Eagleton says, because it die
not have the opportunity to take over the entire world and impose its system universally
For obvious reasons, most nations have considered and rejected this "I know you think I
am a totalitarian, but give me complete control of the world and I will show you I am not"
argument. When someone says, Im no thief, but I offer you a choice: your money or your
life," you should assume, despite whatever he claims to be, that he is prepared to take both.
For the record, Marx himself insisted that communism must be imposed worldwide. The
final words of The Communist Mat auo, call upon the workers of the world to "unite -they
have "a world to win"56
Contrary to popular sentiment that Marxism is a
and de on paper tand ournever worked in practice,
thefrightening implications of a Marxist sociology show
that Marxism was a bad idea right from the start. Its
underlying assumptions simply do not match up with
reality. Some years ago a movie called Enemy at the Gates
captured this sentiment with poetic precision. As the ace
Russian sniper Vassili waits patiently for his target, his
friend Danilov says,
For the record, Marx
himself insisted that
communism must be
imposed worldwide.
The final words of The
Communist Manifesto call
upon the workers of the
world to "unite" -they
have "a world to win."
I've been such a fool, Vassili. Man will always be man.
There is no new man. We tried so hard to create a so-
ciety that was equal, where there would be nothing to envy your neighbor. But there is
always something to envy. A smile, a friendship, something you don't have and want to
appropriate. In this world, even a Soviet one, there will always be rich and poor-rich
in gifts, poor in gifts; rich in love, poor in love.
Overlooking this simple truth, Marxism pushed the domino of envy, setting in motion a
cascade of consequences affecting billions of people to this day. Short of a miraculous change
of heart and mind at the societal level, the suffering is almost sure to continue.
5. POSTMODERNISM
The Postmodernist agrees with the Secularist and the Marxist: humans are nothing more
than the sum total of the economic, legal, and personal relationships developed in a given
society. Michel Foucault said,
The most crucial subject to our existence [is] the society in which we live, the economic
relations within which it functions, and the system of power which defines the regular
forms and the regular permissions and prohibitions of our conduct. The essence of
our life consists, after all, of the political functioning of the society in which we find
ourselves.
Living within this order is "the essence of our life. Our culture determines who we are.
To Fredric Jameson, a Marxist ofessor who regularly comments on Postmodernism, not
even space and time are "natural"; tuy are "projected afterimages" of structures of making
and acquiring things.58
Postmodernism in sociology, thenhinkn be described as social constructionism, the belief
that human beings and society do not have essences that
exist in and of themselves, but are constructed through
many layers of conversations and experiences.
If society is the sum total of our relationships, then
what glue holds those relationships together? Jacques
Derrida said the one thing that universally signifies the
relationship between our phsical existence and our
Social Constructionism:
the belief that human
beings and society are
social constructions
shaped by language and
subjective experiences.
minds is spoken language 59 Spoken language (and our


<!-- page-7 -->

writing down what we say) is at the heart of the Postmodernists concern. If no metanarra
Fves (unitying stories about the world that aspire to explan ever yuling as it trom a Gods-ey
viewpoint) are true, all we can do is talk'syooq our preterences, and these preterences are al
valid, no matter how ridiculous or incoherent they appear. Ironically, Postmodernists end
up building a metanarrative of talk, and those who chat away under the illusion that their
talk is worth listening to, or whose nonverbal behavior situates them powerfully, become
the new cultural elite.
When it comes to deconstructing society's institutions, Postmodernists are particu-
larly critical of religion, especially Roman Catholicism. In The Future of Religion, Richard
Rorty described his view as "anticlericalism" rather than "atheism." He didn't object to
congregations of "the faithful" but targeted "ecclesiastical institutions" as dangerous to a
society's health. "Religion is unobjectionable," he said, "as long as it is privatized You
can be crazy on your own time-but when religious people start getting together, they
form ideas about society, and such ideas must be firmly rejected. In his speeches, Rorty
often quoted Denis Diderot: "Man will never be free until the last king is strangled with
the entrails of the last priest 62
Postmodernists, those of a Secularist bent anyway, show their contempt for Christian
concepts oflove, sex, and marriage. Postmodernist psychiatrist Adam Phillips is particularly
harsh: "The only sane foregone conclusion about any relationship is that it is an experiment;
and that exactly what it is an experiment in will never be clear to the participants. For the
sane, so-called relationships could never be subject to contract"63 To this way of thinking,
it is insane to desire marriage. The very concept of a father, mother, and children forms a
"heterosexist norm," which enables society "to marginalize some sexual practices as against
nature, and thereby [attempt] to prove the naturalness of the heterosexual monogamy and
family values upon which mainstream society bases itself."64
So how should we rid ourselves of this "heterosexist norm?" By pushing the boundaries
so far that people forget what used to be normal. This means talking about sex all the time,
and the more deviant, the better. According to Foucault,
(Talk about sex reveals] an ever expanding encyclopedia of preferences, gratifications
and perversions. It creates a realm of perversion by discovering, commenting on
and exploring it. It brings it into being as an object of study and in doing so serves
to categorize and objectify those who occupy what has been made into the secret
underworld of deviance 65
To Foucault, the problem was not the perversion of sex but feeling guilty for having
done so: "We must ... ask why we bu enurselves today with so much guilt for having
once made sex a sin "66
Speaking for himself, Foucault admitf d to being "a disciple of the Marquis de Sade"6
This is, or ought to be, troubling to civilized people. De Sade was a French aristocrat who sex-
ually mistreated everyone around him ancs auoilly recorded his violent and criminal acts in
books. The term sadism, the enjoyment of inflicting pain on others, is derived from his name.
For Postmodernists, there is somethinndwrong with people who are uncomfortable with
endless talk about aberrant sexuality. Some universities, Yale University, the University of
Southern California, and the University of Tennessee among them, host "sex weeks" in which
pornographic films are screened, porn stars are featured
on campus (as speakers, presumably), and safe-sex kits
are handed out. Many universities have approved courses
that focus on issues related to sex and gender conflicts.
For example, Stanford Universit's 2013-2014 course list-
ing induded FEMGEN 140A-Destroying Dichotomies:
Exploring Multiple Sex, Gender, and Sexual Identities:
For Postmodernists,
there is something
wrong with people
who are uncomfortable
with endless talk about
aberrant sexuality.
This course is designed to broaden the student's
awareness of the human experience by introducing scholarly debates about sex, gen-
der and sexual identities and expressions. We will consider the socially constructed
nature of sex, gender and sexuality and examine the history and community of those
who identify as intersexual, transgender, homosexual, bisexual, asexual, pansexual
and/or queer through texts, discussion, films, and class presentations. 68
Why, one might ask, do Postmodernists insist on being so "in your face" about sex? As
you will recall from our chapter on Postmodernism, Postmodernists view all metanarratives
with suspicion. To Jean-François Lyotard, openly talking about things that make people un-
comfortable was a way to "gnaw away at the great institutionalized narrative apparatuses...
by increasing the number of skirmishes that take place on the sidelines"69
For Lyotard, this "gnawing away" included picking quarrels with people who disagree,
turning vices into virtues. He went so far as to defend the actions of the North American
Man/Boy Love Association (NAMBLA), whose motto was once "Eight is too late, meaning
that men should be allowed to engage in consensual sex with boys under the age of eight.?.
Glenn Ward says, "None of these activities might strike you as particularly radical-they are
perhaps not going to bring about a revolution-but from Lyotard's point of view they can be
valued as disruptive skirmishes in the social system."
It is unclear what Postmodernists think these actions will accomplish, if anything, in
building a healthy society. This much is clear, though: Postmodernists, those who react so
strongly against the idea that we have any direct access to reality, act as if they have direct
aces when it comes to trying to break the "heterosexist norm" so that everything possible
becomes permissible, everything pell issible becomes desirable, and everything desirable
becomes normal. If vou don't like it, don't be surprised if Postmodernists accuse you of being
a bigot who wants to mandate your intolerant point of view.
6. NEW SPIRITUALITY
Because social institutions imply 10 slucture and limits, New Spiritualists tend to view
them as outdated The only limit ic this he responsible. "Your decision to evolve consciously
through responsible choice," says Gary Zukav, "contributes not only to your own evolution,
but also to the evolution of all of thoschispects of humanity in which you participate. It is not
just you that is evolving through your decisions, but the entirety of humanity"7
As we discussed in the "Psych?' logy" chapter, the New Spiritualist says there is no such
thing as an individual person, or "self.*There is only consciousness, and we are all an insep
arable part of it. Psychology, the study of the person, and sociology, the study of society, are


<!-- page-8 (book p.321) -->

really the same thing. In sociology, New Spirituality can
Collective Consciousness:
the belief that everything
is ultimately energy and
that everyone possesses the
potential to achieve divine
unity with the cosmos.
be described by the term collective consciousness, the
belief that together we can pursue higher consciousness
and arrive at a healthy, happy society.
New Spiritualists express concern when they per-
ceive society's structures as limiting peoples ability or
inclination to pursue higher consciousness. According
to Marilyn Ferguson, "Every society, by offering its au-
tomatic judgments, limits the vision of its members. From our earliest years we are seduced
into a system of beliefs that becomes so inextricably braided into our experience that we
cannot tell culture from nature?"73
Social institutions, according to the New Spiritualist, should be structured to encourage
the search for inner truth. David Spangler suggests looking at the objects, people, and events
in our lives and saying, "You are sacred. In you and with you I can find the sacramental
passages that reconnect me to the wholeness of creation." With this perspective it will pre-
sumably become clear what kind of political, economic, artistic, educational, or scientific
institutions we need.?4
New Spiritualists who have meditated on these "sacramental passages" have apparently
concluded one thing, at least: marriage is a sacramental dead end. Shakti Gawain enthuses,
"People who divorce almost inevitably feel that they have failed, because they assume all
marriages should last forever. In most such cases, however, the marriage has actually been
a total success-it's helped each person to grow to the point where they no longer need its
old form75
What of those who may be hurt by the divorce, the children or a spouse who wants to
stay married? Their pain simply shows how unenlightened they are. To Gawain, attempting
to maintain traditional marriage and family is counterevolutionary:
Relationships and families as we've known them seem to be falling apart at a rapid
rate. Many people are panicky about this; some try to re-establish the old traditions
and value systems in order to cling to a feeling of order and stability in their lives. It's
useless to try to go backward, however, because our consciousness has already evolved
beyond the level where we were willing to make the sacrifices necessary to live that way?
Limits hamper growth; let us do away with them. According to Kevin Ryerson, "An
individual's sexual preference should be viewed as neither good nor evil-such preference.
are but the functioning of the body's dialogue to and with another??
The heart of society's problem, New Spiritualists say, is ignorance of higher consciousness.
Education is needed. In an essay titled "A Religion for the New Age", author and poet John
Dunphy implores educators to view themselves as evangelists:
I am convinced that the battle for humankind's future must be waged and won in the
public school classrooms by teachers who correctly perceive their role as proselytizers
of a new faith: a religion of humanity that recognizes and respects the spark of what
theologians call the Divinity in every human being. These teachers must embody the
same selfless dedication as the most rabid fundamentalist preachers?®
Many New Spiritualists have taken up the chal-
lenge of educating the rising generation to their way
of thinking. When Marilyn Ferguson interviewed New
Spiritualist professionals for her book The Aquarian Con-
spiracy, "more were involved in education than in any
other single category of work?" By teaching children the
Many New Spiritualists
have taken up the
challenge of educating the
rising generation to their
way of thinking.
proper attitudes toward themselves and consciousness,
New Spiritualist educators hope to usher in higher consciousness.
According to the New Spiritualist, modern society's traditional views hinder our evolution.
If we transcend those limits and become truly aware of our God nature, we gain the power
to change society. Society can help by changing whatever institutions inhibit our individual
evolution to higher consciousness.
7. ISLAM
Whereas Secularism, Marxism, Postmodernism, and New Spirituality minimize the
sociological significance of the family, Islam enshrines it. In fact, many people perceive that
boundaries between the family, church, and state do not exist in Islam. Islam is a totalizing
worldview that accounts for and dictates the structure of everything. Muslims often describe
this vision as ummah, which refers to a shared sense of identity among Muslims all over the
world that extends to community, religious belief, and even political structures. Muslims
believe Islam provides a perfect harmony between the individual and society, holding both
in concert with each other. According to Khurshid Ahmad,
Islam ... establishes a balance between individualism and collectivism. It believes in
the individual personality of man and holds everyone personally accountable to God.
It guarantees the fundamental rights of the individual and does not permit anyone to
tamper with them. It makes the proper development of the personality of man one of
the prime objectives of its educational policy. It does not subscribe to the view that
man must lose his individuality in society or in the stat.... On the other hand, it also
awakens a sense of social responsibility in man, organizes human beings in a society
and a state and enjoins the individual to subscribe to the social good.
"Equality for all" may be Ahmad's ideal vision of Islam, but one would be wise to read the
fine print. On the surface, the Quran sets men and women on equal spiritual footing before
Allah, but other Islamic writings view women as destined for eternal punishment unless
strictly controlled. A passage in the Sunnah, a respected
source about Muhammad's teachings, says, "I looked at
Paradise and found poor people forming the majority
On the surface, the Quran
of its inhabitants; and I looked at Hell and saw that the
sets men and women on
majority of its inhabitants were women."l
equal spiritual footing
before Allah, but other
The Muslim view of marriage has traditionally been
Islamic writings view
a business contract that reflects a deep distrust of women.
the following are the primary teatures of marriage loun
women as destined for
eternal punishment unless
strictly controlled.


<!-- page-9 -->

• A Muslim man may marry up to forr wives, granted that he treat them equally and
provide for each of them (4:3).
• A Muslim man is allowed to have sex with women he has captured during war (23:1-6:
33:50; 70:22-30).
• A Muslim man may marry a woman temporarily, a marriage lasting a relatively short
time (4:24).
• Muslim men may marry Jewish or Christian wives (5:5) - though not women from
other religions (2:221), and yet, Muslim women may never marry non-Muslims
(2:221).82
• Unsubmissive women may be beaten (4:34).
"Your wives are as a tilth unto you; so approach your tilth when or how ye will" (2:223),
meaning that women are to be plowed like a field—men may have sexual access to their
wives whenever and however they please, except when the wife is menstruating (2:222).
• Adultery is severely punished (4:15-18; 17:32; 24:20), but in common practice, the
application of punishment often falls much harder on women than men, since the
value of a woman's testimony is discounted.
• Men may divorce their wives (60:1-2; 65:1-2; 226:242), though reconciliation is to be
sought (4:35). The Quran makes no allowance for a woman to divorce her husband,
although some Muslim countries have permitted it.
Patriarchal (from the Latin word for "father,, patri), the word we use to refer to a society
dominated by men, accurately describes most Muslim societies. In a patriarchal society, the
primary duty of women is to have children, especially male children. Vivienne Stacey paints
a troubling picture:
Patriarchal Society: a
society dominated by men.
How often a wife is in distress because she has not
produced a child! The wife who produces only girls
will also seek religious help as well as perhaps medical
help. If she has a son she will want more sons in case
the child dies, as it may easily do. So a woman's importance in society in general is
estimated by her ability to produce sons. This is an inequality between the sexes which
the laws of a country and the efforts of family planning associations can do little about
Muslims educated in Western universities have tried to move past the conflict between
hese traditions and genetics or other phi asay concerns. Nevertheless, men expect their
wives to bear male children, and women's fear of failing to fulfill these expectations persists
in the Muslim world.
When it comes to the actual organization of s‹it iety, Islam does not distinguish between
social institutions and the state. Islam )omprehensive reality, a form of government as
well as a religion. Today, the Muslim world is divided between those who favor nation-state
(with laws, constitutions, and boundaries distinct from other nations) and those who tavor
pan-Islam (the vision that the Muslim community should be united, with diminished or
nonexistent national boundaries). Those who favor nation-states sometimes produce Mus-
lim nations where the population is pr 23:1-6: nantly Muslim but shariah is not the law of the
land, or not purely so. For example, Turkey is a Muslim
nation whose constitution is not based on shariah law.
Although most of its population is Muslim, Turkey (as
of this writing) is a secular nation.
However, even within these more moderate coun-
tries, Muslims who favor a pan- Islamic community are
seeking the establishment of shariah through reform,
Pan-Islam: the belief
that all Muslims should
be united under a single
Islamic state or that
the world should be
united under a global
denouncement, protest, and even terrorism. Much of the
international instability in the early twenty-first century
in nations like Egypt is due to those Islamists who want to dethrone the dominant Secularism
and create a state more faithful to Islamic teachings.
8. CHRISTIANITY
Let's return to a dilemma we faced at the beginning of this chapter. If the underlying
assumptions of sociology are inherently anti-Christian, is Christian sociology actually pos-
sible? The answer to this question is straightforward: yes, provided that sociology is properly
defined by its object of study-individuals and society- rather than by Secularist assumptions
that mandate certain methods. We need more tools in the toolbox.
We also need to understand where these tools come from. Pitirim Sorokin, the founder
of Harvard's sociology department, attempted to offer an understanding in Social and Cul-
tural Dynamics. Sorokin proposed that sociology needs to distinguish between "first culture
and second culture societies 4 First cultures assume truth exists, which leads to certain
methods of inquiry. Second cultures assume truth does not exist, which changes how they
see the world. Trying to understand first cultures with second-culture assumptions is like
trying to explain why people are attracted to the Mona Lisa painting by weighing it or using
a computer to analyze its coloring. Scales and computers are not bad; they are just limited
in assessing aesthetic value.
Sorokin irritated sociologists because he was, in effect, proposing a sociology of so-
cology. He examined how many sociologists arrived at their viewpoints and why. This
s digging around in sociology's toolbox made sociologists appear to have a political or social,
rather than scholarly, agenda. It didn't matter to them if Sorokin was correct. They didn't
like it. Once the sociological community elabraced a limited Secularist toolbox, Sorokin's
name and significant contribution to the field were all but erased from contemporary
sociological study.85
We think Sorokin's point was valid arYl helpful. We can better understand individuals and
society it, rather than forcing them to submit to unsuitable methods of analysis, we approach
them on their own terms. When we look at individuals and society on their own terms, the
Christian sociological claim becomes simple: society functions best when organized around
the family (father mother, and children) ares the institutions naturally flowing from it. We
see the foundations of culture in Genesis 1 when God said to the man and woman, "Be
fruitful and multiply; fill the earth." We see family in Genesis 2 when the man and woman
blt ume "one flesh" in order to accomplish the command to be fruittul and multiply. We see
the initiations of worship, government, urbanization, agriculture, animal domestication,


<!-- page-10 -->

music, metallurgy, and the development of weapons in
The Christian sociological
claim becomes simple:
society functions best
when organized around
the family (father, mother,
and children) and the
institutions naturally
flowing from it.
Genesis 4. Civil government with the power to punish
those who stray is assumed as well. The basic institutions
of society were there from the start.
Those who view God, Adam and Eve, the garden of
Eden, the fall, and the divine institution (and hence the
sanctity) of the family as nothing more than prescientific
myths risk ending up with a very different sociology than
those who see those events as legitimate history. Chris-
tians say that ignorance of and rebellion against God's
design is the best explanation for the failures we see in contemporary society, such as drug
and alcohol abuse, crime, abortion, sexual perversion, human trafficking, disease, and poverty.
For Christians, the family (as opposed to individuals, economic structures, spoken lan-
guage, higher consciousness, or the Quran) is the glue of society. Societies can survive the
miseries of corruption, violence, and crime, but if the family falls apart, societal collapse is
inevitable Such unraveling is now a statistical reality: poverty is epidemic among families
headed by single women; young men and women between seventeen and twenty-four years
of age are far more likely to abuse drugs or commit crimes if they come from fatherless
homes; legalized abortion has led to a devaluing of children; and child-abuse rates have risen
in tandem with abortion rates. Being raised by parents who have been involved in same-sex
relationships is correlated with several negative social outcomes, including crime, substance
abuse, and forced sexual encounters.
According to the biblical view, the correction for these ills is a disciplined commitment to
marriage between one man and one woman, for life. This, not bigotry, explains why Christians
call for a return to traditional marriage and traditional values, such as love, fidelity, and respect.
How does the family fit with the church and the government in the Christian view? It
starts with this: God owns everything. Abraham Kuyper, a deeply respected theologian who
eventually became the prime minister of the Netherlands, Famously summarized the authority
of Christ over all things: "There is not one square inch of the entire creation about which
Jesus Christ does not cry out, 'This is mine! This belongs to me!'*&
As God's image bearers, we are caretakers. We are to watch over creation, reflecting and
expressing God's truth. In what areas of society are we to do this? Christian theologians have
contemplated this question for a long time. The Puritan theologian and Cambridge professor
William Perkins studied biblical texts and concluded that God had ordained three distinct
spheres of society:
Nowall societies of men are bodies, a family is a body, and so is every particular Church
a body, and the Commonwealth also; and in these bodies there are several members,
which are men walking in several callings and offices, the execution whereof must
tend to the happy and good estate of the rest, yea of all men everywhere, as much as
possible is 9
Perkins's emphasis on three spheres of society-family, church, and state—-became th
basis for a lecture series Kuype! ive at Princeton University at the end of the nineteenth
domain. When the spheres are balanced and each institution is properly managing its own
century. Kuyper called for a view of sphere sovereignty in which each sphere has a proper
areas of responsibility; peace and prosperity result. When
they are imbalanced because am insultution abandons its
responsibility or oversteps into another domain, soci-
ely begins to unravel and head toward oppression and
Sphere Sovereignty:
the belief that God
ordained certain spheres
misery.
Think of sphere sovereignty as three balloons in a
of society, such as family,
box just big enough to fit them all. If one balloon is blown
church, and state, and
up bigger, the other two get squeezed. Sphere sovereignty
that society functions
says the balance between the institutions in society is like
best when each sphere is
that. If the church sphere gets too big, as often happened
properly managing its own
in the Middle Ages, families and the government will get
area of responsibility.
squeezed. If the family sphere gets too big, as happened
in Italy in the 1400s when a handful of powerful families, such as the Medici, controlled ev-
erything, the church and the government will find it difficult to operate properly. Today, the
rapid expansion of government can be expected to hurt families and churches.
How do we decide wisely about the proper balance between the spheres? When faced with
a decision, such as who should take care of the poor, we need to grapple with three questions:
1. Is this the proper domain of this sphere?
2. What is the effect on the other spheres?
3. Could this problem be better solved another way?
Let's say a city government has to make decisions about caring for children who are
without families. The city could decide to take matters into its own hands and house the
children in city-run orphanages. Is this wise? The government taking on the responsibility
of raising children could risk damaging the family sphere and allowing the church to forgo
Its responsibility to the fathere 10s. Also, the government is not equipped like the family or
the church to offer the sort of precise solutions required when dealing with individual lives.
If, on the other hand, the city government asks churches for help, the churches can recruit
and support tamilies willing to take in foster children. The government can exercise its prope
role as a clearinghouse for identifying children in need ot help. Familles can expand their
borders and give unwanted chistinen a loving environment in which to grow and flourish.
Thinking properly about the role of each sphere of society not only relieves the government
or improperly bearing too many responsibilities but also
mobilizes communities of people to seek solutions at the
level closest to the problem. This principle of selecting
The government is not
the solution closest to the level of the problem is called
equipped like the family
subsidiarity.
or the church to offer the
Applying sphere sovereignty takes practice, but it
sort of precise solutions
avoids idolizing civil government—or churches and fam-
required when dealing
lies, for that matter-and it points the way to using the
with individual lives.
. 325-


<!-- page-11 (book p.327) -->

assets of our communities in the way God designed. It pries away the illicit allure of govern.
ment as a place to gain power and prestige, putting it back in the hands of people who truly
want to serve rather than be served. This, as we will see
in our chapter on politics, is a major step toward integrity
Subsidiarity: the belief that
decisions are best handled
at the organizational or
societal level closest to the
issues or persons affected.
in political involvement.
In addition to promoting a balanced approach to
society's institutions, a Christian approach to sociology
accounts for individual free will and responsibility better
than a sociological approach based on materialism and
naturalism: because we are made in God's image, we can
each bear responsibility for our actions. If right and wrong and good and evil actually exist,
if there is more than the natural, material world, more than atoms swirling through space,
and if we are free to choose right over wrong and good over evil, then taking responsibility
can actually make society better.
Responsibility is the passport to the world of society-shaping opportunity. William Stan-
meyer explains:
If man's behavior were somehow conditioned by genetic code or social externals then
no just judge could blame him for the evil he commits. But the scripture teaches
unequivocally that God blamed Adam and Eve for succumbing to the temptation to
disobedience and punished them accordingly?
Adam and Eve's failure to obey God in the garden of Eden resulted not only in their ex-
pulsion from the garden paradise but also in a cycle of paranoia, blame, and harmful actions
toward others.
Adam and Eve were, in the words of Saint Augustine, "free but not freed" - able to choose
but incapable of fully choosing the good. We suffer from the same malady today. We Lose
the ability to create a flourishing society and are bled of the motivation to do so. Human
persistence in choosing the wrong course has left the scar tissue of alienation, imperfection,
and sin everywhere. Choosing to step away from our responsibility takes a little fire out of
our souls, so to speak. It diminishes who we are as persons and deprives us of purpose.
Here are some tragic examples: The philosopher Jean-Jacques Rousseau proclaimed a
love of childhood innocence. but he ahandoned all five ofhis children to orphanages, where
their chances of survival were remote. Karl Marx destroved his relationshin with his lov
ing wife by impregnating their housekeeper. Friedrich
Adam and Eve's failure to
obey God in the garden
of Eden resulted not only
in their expulsion from
the garden paradise but
also in a cycle of paranoia,
blame, and harmful
actions toward others.
Engels nervously shuffled between two homes so he
could live with both his wife and his lover." However,
it's not just atheists who provide these examples. King
David impregnated a woman and then had her husband
killed, which led to a civil war within his own family.
Noted Christians have fallen morally. Scripture says,
«The heart is deceitful above all things and desperately
sick" (Jer. 17:9). None of us are immune.
-oh.
9. IMPLICATIONS UNIQUE TO A CHRISTIAN VIEW OF SOCIOLOGY
The human condition is a sordid tale of degeneration and devolution rather than evo-
lution. Alienation pervades our relationships with God, with others, and even within our
elves, It almost goes without saying that sociologists who have this humble understanding
will interpret data differently from those who believe we are inherently good but have been
corrupted by our society and environment.
The Christian worldview promotes involvement in making society better, but it does so
based on actual truths and a call to responsible choices. Christian sociology sees each person
as valuable and able to contribute to society. Thus we are not helpless in the face of societal
that atheists may think that "nations, classes, civilizations must be more important than in-
and environmental pressures. We are mighty as image bearers of God. C. S. Lewis explained
dividuals, because "individuals live only seventy odd years each and the group may last for
centuries. But to the Christian, individuals are more important, for they live eternally; and
races, civilizations and the like are in comparison the creatures of a day?93
Here are some of the implications unique to a Christian view of sociology:
The importance of the individual as a social being. We were created as social beings (Gen.
2:20)* and recognize the role society plays in history as well as in our relationships with God.
Society exists because we are relational. S. D. Gaede says, "God designed the human being to
be a relational creature. Note this point well. Humankind was created to relate to other beings.
It was not an accident. It was not the result of sin. It was an intentional, creational given."'s
Nevertheless, because of the fall we continue to experience alienation, which Gaede refers
to as the "relational dilemma." Because Christians understand the cause of this dilemma, we
can point the way to solutions.
The embrace of human value. Greece and Rome were haughty, elite-driven cultures
with no respect for ordinary people. And yet Jesus taught that the "last will be first and
the first will be last" (Matt. 20:16; Mark 10:43; Luke 22:27).? In Christ's economy, image
bearers of God succeed by serving other image bearers of God. This leads to dramatic
change: followers become constituents and subjects become customers. It was Christians
who elevated the status of women, built hospitals and schools, and instituted ministries to
the poor. According to Rodney Stark, effective moral
opposition to slavery arose only because of Christian
theology. Various cultures have opposed slavery in
It was Christians who
certain circumstances or for themselves, but oppos-
elevated the status of
ing slavery in all its forms because it was sinful was a
women, built hospitals
Christian impulse unique in the world to this very day.
and schools, and instituted
ministries to the poor.
The recognition of both the individual and society.
Some worldviews have a radical focus on the individual.
Others ignore individuals and focus only on society. From a Christian perspective, both must
be valued. This perspective ensures, as one Christian sociology text memorably phrased it,
that we "can never be reduced to either a mere atomistic individual or a mere integer in some
social whole" Both the individual and societal groups are accountable to God (Acts 17:31),100


<!-- page-12 (book p.329) -->

and it each person acts responsibly, then each societa Insultution can tocus on governing is
realm of interest properly and allowing other institutions the same freedom.
A proper balance between the institutions of family, church, and state. In Christian so-
ciology, the family, the church, and the state are God-ordained institutions. Dietrich Bonhofer
and some others rightly included labor as a fourth God-ordained institution. Realizing that
God ordained these societal institutions demonstrates the relevance of Christianity to every
aspect of reality. Bonhoeffer explained, "It is God's will that there shall be labor, marriage,
government, and church in the world; and it is His will that all these, each in its own way,
shall be through Christ, directed towards Christ, and in Christ... This means that there can
be no retreating from a 'secular' into a 'spiritual sphere"l Nothing lies outside the realm of
Christianity's influence. All society, indeed all of life, is bound inextricably with God and his
plan for the world. In Bonhoeffer's view, "the world is relative to Christ""102
An ennobling perspective on government. Even though governmental leaders often
make poor decisions, Christian sociology does not take a pessimistic view of government.
Instead, Christian sociology is optimistic because our freedom and responsibility be-
fore God grant us dignity and significance, which empowers us to structure governments
properly, protect the innocent, and maintain justice.
Francis Schaeffer explained that we are "not a cog in a
Government is not
the source of all of our
problems, nor is it the
machine, ... not a piece of theater; [we] really can influ-
ence history. From the biblical viewpoint, [we are lost,
but great." 103 Christians like William Carey and William
Wilberforce, for example, were able to work through
both the church and government to change society-
and history-by bringing an end to the slave trade. 104 Because of our understanding of the
sin nature, though, it is wise to keep government's powers in perspective. Government is not
God. It secures rights but does not invent them. It acknowledges human value but does not
grant it. Government is not the source of all of our problems, nor is it the solution to them.
A love for the family. From a Christian worldview, God ordained the family (Gen.
2:23-25)105 and is a fundamental social institution. Scripture teaches in Ephesians 5:25 that
husbands should love their wives just as "Christ loved the church." In ancient Greece and
Rome, sexual perversion, especially homosexual pedophilia, was common. Only in Chris-
fianity, said Will Durant, did sexual fidelity become a virtue106 If marriage and the family
are in trouble, society will be in trouble. Christians should give serious consideration to
promoting marriage-not just in the abstract but in concrete ways-by helping husbands
and wives stay together and encouraging them to be moral and spiritual examples to their
children. All of society benefits.
A proper role for the church. God ordained the church to serve specific functions. One
principal role of the church is to proclaim the truth regarding sin, repentance, and salvatior
Another role is to form individuals into communities working together to nurture one an-
other and serve the larger society. The church can model true community by demonstrating
what it means to "love your neighbor as yourself"107 Francis Schaeffer was adamant about
the need for community in the Christian church: "I am convinced that in the 20th centur
people all over the world will not listen if we have the right doctrine, the right polity, bu
Ephesians 4:11-16, which says,
are not exhibiting community." 0s This timeless call to serve others in love is grounded in
(God gave the apostles, the prophets, the evangelists, the shepherds and teachers, to
equip the saints for the work of ministry, for building up the body of Chris... We
are to grow up in every way into him who is the head, into Christ, from whom the
whole body, joined and held together by every joint with which it is equipped, when
each part is working properly, makes the body grow so that it builds itself up in love.
The church is not merely a place for people to listen to sermons. It is a place where laborers,
bankers, medical practitioners, missionaries, craftsmen, elected officials, mechanics, scientists,
restauranteurs, clerks, students, entrepreneurs, geologists, pastors, teachers, dishwashers,
equipment operators, childcare providers, government bureaucrats, moms, dads, children,
and singles all learn to obey God in every area where Christ has authority.
Jesus made clear the significance of the church in the Christian worldview. At a place
called Caesarea Philippi, Jesus asked his disciples, "Who do you say that I am?" Peter replied,
"You are the Christ, the Son of the living God." Upon hearing Peter's reply, Jesus said, "I tell
you, you are Peter, and on this rock I will build my church, and the gates of hell shall not
prevail against it?"09 This reference to Peter (petros, or "stone") and "rock" (petra, or "large
rock") combine poetically with the reference to the gates of Hades-both features of Caesarea
Philippi, which was a center of religious and political worship. Jesus was giving an object
Lesson: wherever people gather is where the church is to be built.
Furthermore, in using the word church (ekklesia), Jesus was framing the civic purpose
of the church. The word ekklesia, according to pastor Tony Evans, essentially refers to a
group of people who have been "called out from the general population to serve in the
parliament, congress, or counsel of the community in order to establish the governance,
guidelines, rules, and regulations for the broader citizenry? Evans continues, "To be a part
of the church of Jesus Christ, as Jesus defined it, is to be a part of a spiritual legislative body
tasked to enact heaven's viewpoint in hell's society.?"!1o
Jesus taught that the church is more than a place to worship at the edges of culture; it
belongs at the very center of culture and society in order to teach and model who God is
and how the human race might be redeemed. The church is a feast, a forever family. More
than that, in a world where evil tries to ensnare us, the church is a unifving force. It stand
against evil and reminds society of what is true and just.
The church is not just a way of living for those who like
is it s the very model of what the good life is all about.
10. CONCLUSION
Worldviews committed to materialism and natu-
ralism discount the ability of individual human beings
• make a ditterence in society. heir tollowers also
tend persistently to attack the traditional family!! The
Verstian worldview is constantly criticized tor its call to
Jesus taught that the
church is more than
a place to worship at
the edges of culture; it
belongs at the very center
of culture and society in
order to teach and model
who God is and how
the human race might
be redeemed.
selt-restraint, responsibility, work, and caring for other


<!-- page-13 -->

even when it is not convenient. But the evidence of history speaks more loudly. We are not
free to wreak mayhem in the social order, but we are tree to serve others in love and to serv
and love God.
What difference does it make? Christianity's impact was aptly summarized by the
nineteenth-century poet James Russell Lowell:
I challenge any skeptic to find a ten-square-mile spot on this planet where they
can live their lives in peace and safety and decency, where womanhood is honored,
where infancy and old age are revered, where they can educate their children, where
the Gospel of Jesus Christ has not gone first to prepare the way. If they find such a
place, then I would encourage them to emigrate thither and there proclaim their
unbelief.!
Those who hold to Christian values of society need not apologize or timidly defer to
those who scorn them, but neither should they have a haughty attitude. Our first response,
the Christian worldview says, is gratitude to God— for creating us to flourish and for making
it possible to do so. Our second response, immediately following, is to act on that gratefulness
as stewards made in God's image.
In order to live together in peace and harmony, though, we need a firm basis for how
society ought to establish order and secure justice. This gets into the field of law, in which
the collision between worldviews threatens to become a winner-takes-all approach to soci-
ety. Simultaneously fascinating, complicated, and disturbing, the study of law is the topic to
which we next turn our attention.
ENDNOTES
1. Thomas Low Nichols, Forty Years of American Life (Portland: Angell Press, 2007), 20. See an excerpt at "A Portrait of America,
1830," EyeWitness to History, 2008, accessed April 464-14, www.eyewitnesstohistory.com/america1830.htm.
2. Alexis de Tocqueville, Democracy in America, trans. George Lawrence New York: Harper Perennial, 1988), 464-65
3. James C. Dobson and Gary L. Bauer, Children at Risk: The Battle for the Hearts and Minds of Our Kids (Dallas: Word, 1990), 19
4. peM uosMervey, 2008, cited in Kathy Wyer, "Political Engagement among College Freshmen Hits 40-Year High,"
anuary 22, 2009, UCLA Newsroom, http://newsroadi.ucla.edu/releases/political-engagement-of-college-78404.
5. "Twentysomethings Struggle to Find Their Place ing hristian Churches," Barna Research Online, September
24, 2003, www.barna.org/component/content/article/5-ba-update/45-barna-update-sp-657/127-twenty
somethings-struggle-to-find-their-place-in-christian-churches*.VszmhFy2bIU.
6 Ken Ham and Britt Beemer, Already Gone: Why Your Kitsuruat Church and What You Can Do to Stop It (Green Forest,
AR: Master Books, 2009), 24.
" eH a n Langements: 2011," US Census Bureau, accessed March 27, 2014, www.census.gov
hhes/families/data/cps2011.html.
8. See Kathleen A. Kovner Kline, Hardwired to Connect: The New Scientific Case for Authoritative Communities (New York:
Broadway, 2003), 8. This crucial report was produced jointly by the YMCA of the USA, the Commission on Children
at Risk, Dartmouth Medical School, and the Institute for American Values.
9. George Barna, Transforming Children into Spiritual Champions (Ventura, CA: Regal Books, 2003), 125.
10. Quoted in James Tonkowich, "When Scripture Becomes an A-La-Carte Menu," By Faith, June 17, 2010, http://
byfaithonline.com/when-scripture-becomes-an-a-la-carte-menu/.
Il. Steve Bruce, Sociology: A Very Short Introduction (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1999), 18.
12. Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley, Frankenstein, or the Modern Prometheus (Rockville, MD: TARK Classic Fiction, 2008), 76.
13. Shelley, Frankenstein. J. F. Baldwin Jr.'s Deadliest Monster (New Braunfels, TX: Fishermen Press, 2005) is an excellent
book exploring the view of human nature in Shelley's Frankenstein and Robert Louis Stevenson's The Strange Case of
Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde.
14. Quoted in John F. Glass and John R. Staude, eds., Humanistic Society (Pacific Palisades, CA: Goodyear, 1972), 352.
15. According to Maurice R. Stein, "Humanist sociology views society as a historically evolving enterprise that
can only be understood through the struggle to liberate human potentialities." Quoted in Glass and Staude,
Humanistic Society, 165.
16. Patricia Hill Collins, "Perceptivity and the Activist Potential of the Sociology Classroom," Humanity and Society
(August 1986): 341.
17. This use of science is sometimes called postnormal science.
18. Quoted in Mark Schoofs, 'International Forum Debates Treatment of Homosexuality Washington Blade, December
18, 1987, 19.
19. Christian Smith, "Secularizing American Higher Education," in Christian Smith, ed. The Secular Revolution:
Power, Interests, and Conflict in the Secularization of American Public Life (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press,
2003), 101.
20. Smith, Secular Revolution.
2. See the introduction to Christopher Dawson, Religion and the Rise of Western Culture (New York: Doubleday, 1950),
Dawson was a highly regarded historian whose remaroos ino Aqubject were part of his Gifford Lectures, a historical
lecture series given at universities in Scotland.
22, Hunter Baker, The End of Secularism (Wheaton, IL: Crossway Books, 2009), 25.
23 Anthony Giddens et al, Introduction to Sociology (New York: W.W. Norton, 2012), 5.
24. Giddens, Introduction to Sociology, 5-6.
25. Giddens, Introduction to Sociology, 8.
suno Aq et al. say, "A long-standing debate in the social sciences revolves around questions of tree will and
eterminism. For example a deterministic framework wiem uosmet that where an individual ends up in life is
significantlv if not entirely influenced by the position into which he or she is born. The sociological imagination
Tugaleterministic in that it pushes us to see that in many ways the lives of individuals are quite determine
by our social roles, gender, race, and class. Yet we would ne we a ty te lesson that inarviduals are
trapped or controlled like puppets." The authors go on to explain that sociologists are not looking for hard-and
study. Giddens, Introduction to Sociology.
ast rules but probabilities in which human behavior can be predicted based on factors sociologists can isolate and
27. Ciddens, Introduction to Sociology, 186.
28. This is the definition of ineaualit oiven in Giddens, Introduction to Sociology, 224.
29. Erich Fromm, Escape from Freedom (New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, 1969), 12
0. Erich From The Sane Societv (New York. Dinghart, and Winston, 1955), 362.


<!-- page-14 (book p.333) -->

31. Walda Katz-Fishman and C. George Benello, Readings in Humanist Sociology (Bayside, NY: General Hall, 1986), 3
2. Lawrence Casler, in Robert Rimmer, "An Interview with Robert Rimmer on Premarital Communes and Grou
Marriages," Humanist (March/April 1974): 14.
33. Sol Gordon, "The Egalitarian Family Is Alive and Well," Humanist (May/June 1975): 18.
34. Robert N. Whitehurst, "Alternative Life-styles," Humanist (May/June 1975): 24.
35. Lester Kirkendall, A New Bill of Sexual Rights and Responsibilities (Buffalo, NY: Prometheus Books, 1976), 9.
36. "GLAAD Media Awards Selection Process," GLAAD Media Awards, accessed April 3, 2014, www.glaad.org/medi
awards/22/selections.
37. See, for example, Mark Regnerus, "How Different Are the Adult Children of Parents Who Have Same-Sex
Relationships?," Social Science Research 41(2012): 752-70.
38. Lawrence Casler, "Permissive Matrimony: Proposals for the Future," Humanist (March/April 1974): 6-7.
39. A particularly horrifying example of this way of thinking is Mary Elizabeth Willams's article at Salon.com.
Williams concludes the article with this line: "I would put the life of a mother over the life of a fetus every single
time-even if I still need to acknowledge my conviction that the fetus is indeed a life. A life worth sacrificing. Mary
Elizabeth Williams, "So What If Abortion Ends Life?," Salon, January 23, 2013, www.salon.com/2013/01/23/so.what
if_abortion ends life/.
40. Fromm, Sane Society, 20.
41. G. V. Plekhanov, The Role of the Individual in History (New York: International Publishers, 1940), 200.
42. V. I. Lenin, The State and Revolution (New York: International Publishers, 1932), 73.
43. Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, The Individual and Society (Moscow: Progress Publishers, 1984), 193.
44. Marx and Engels, Individual and Society, 162.
45. Joseph Stalin said we must rely "on the concrete conditions of the material life of society, as the determining
force of social development; not on the good wishes of great men." Joseph Stalin, Problems of Leninism (Moscow:
Progress Publishers, 1947), 579, quoted in Gustav A. Wetter, Dialectical Materialism (Westport, CT: Greenwood, 1977),
46. Clemens Dutt, ed., Fundamentals of Marxism-Leninism (Moscow: Progress Publishers, 1959), 310, cited in Raymond
S. Sleeper, ed., A Lexicon of Marxist-Leninist Semantics (Alexandria, VA: Western Goals, 1983), 36.
47. Anne Applebaum documents the way this happened in Eastern Europe as well. The Communist Parties identified
popular priests, developed charges against them, and had them arrested as a matter of course. See Anne Applebaum,
Iron Curtain (New York: Doubleday, 2012).
48. Mikhail Gorbachev, Memoirs (New York: Doubleday, 1996), 328.
49. Alexandra M. Kollontai, Communism and the Family (New York: Andrade's Bookshop, 1920), 10, quoted in H. Kent
Geiger, The Family in Soviet Russia (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1970), 51.
50. Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, The Communist Manifesto (New York: Penguin Books, 2002), 240.
51. Frederick Engels, The Origin of the Family, Private Property, and the State (New York: International Publishers,
1942), 67.
52. Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Collected Works, 40 vols. (New York: International Publishers, 1976), 6:354.
53. V. Yazykova, Socialist Life Style and the Family (Moscow: Progress Publishers, 1984), 7.
54. Terry Eagleton, Why Marx Was Right (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2011), 15.
55. Eagleton, Why Marx Was Right, 17.
56. Marx and Engels, Communist Manifesto, 258.
57. Noam Chomsky and Michel Foucault, Human Nature: Justice us. Power (New York: New Press, 2006), 37.
58. Fredric Jameson, Postmoderism: Or, the Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 199), 367.
59. Jacques Derrida, Of Grammatolog) trans. Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press,
60. Theodore Dalrymple warns, "Grammatical latitudinarianism (the elimination of any rules or purpose of language)
(Chatham, UK: Monday Books, 2009), 47.
is the natural ideological ally of moral and cultural relativism." Theodore Dalrymple, Not with a Bang but a Whimper
61. Richard Rorty and Gianni Vattimo, The Future of Religion (New York: Columbia University Press, 2005), 33.
62. Ronald Hamowy, ed., The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 2008), s.v. "Diderot, Deni
63. Quoted in Algis Valiunas, "Mental Health," Weekly Standard 11, no. 9 (November 2005); 41.
64. Glenn Ward, Teach Yourself Postmodernism, 2nd ed. (Chicago: McGraw-Hill, 2003), 145.
65. Quoted in Ward, Teach Yourself Postmodernism, 146.
66. Michel Foucault, The Foucault Reader, ed. Paul Rabinow (New York: Pantheon Books, 1984), 29.
"Postmodern Politics" section for more on the Marquis de Sade.
57. Mark Lilla, The Reckless Mind: Intellectuals in Politics (New York: New York Review Books, 2001), 142. See the
https://feminist.stanford.edu/courses.
68. For more course listings, visit Stanford University's Program in Feminist, Gender, and Sexuality Studies at
69, Ward, Teach Yourself Postmodernism, 176.
T. Ward, Teach Yourself Postmodernism, 176-77.
70. See Anne Henderschott, The Politics of Deviance (San Francisco: Encounter Books, 2002).
12. Gary Zukay, The Seat of the Soul (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1989) 164.
13. Marilyn Ferguson, The Aquarian Conspiracy (Los Angeles: J, P. Tarcher, 1980), 104.
74. David Spangler, Emergence: The Rebirth of the Sacred (New York: Dell, 1984), 82.
15, Shakti Gawain, Living in the light (San Rafael, CA: New World Library, 1986), 110.
76. Gawain, Living in the Light, 3.
T. Kevin Ryerson, Spirit Communication: The Soul's Path (New York: Bantam Books, 1989), 172.
78.John J. Dunphy, "A Religion for a New Age, Humanist January/February 1983): 26.
79. Ferguson, Aquarian Conspiracy, 280.
8o0. Khurshid Ahmad, Islam: Its Meaning and Message, 3rd ed. (Leicester, UK: Islamic Foundation, 199), 38-39.
s1.Sahih al-Bukhari, vol. 4, bk. 54, hadith 464, http://sahih-bukhari.com/Pages/Bukhari 4.54.php.
82. Non-Muslim women who marry Muslim men are portrayed in the movie Not without My Daughter (MCM, 191).
This true-to-life story portrays a Muslim man living in the United States who is caught up the fervor of the Iranian
revolution led by Ayatollah Khomeini in 1979. He returns to ran, ostensibly for "a visit, taking his American wife
and daughter with him. When he refuses to leave, his wife battles Islamic law and tradition in her fight to escape
with her daughter and return to the States.
83. Vivienne Stacey, The Life of Muslim Women (Toronto: Fellowship of Faith for Muslims, 1980), 34-35.
84. Pitirim Sorokin, Social and Cultural Dynamics (Boston: Porter Sargent, 1957), 15.
85. In the Giddens sociology text we referenced earlier, Sorokin merits only one reference in 705 pages of text, and
that on a point of paltry significance.
86. For a helpful essay on this subject, see Kerby Anderson, 'The Decline of a Nation," Probe Ministries, May 27, 1991,
accessed March 27, 2014, www.probe.org/the-decline-of-a-nation/.
87. See, for example, Regnerus, "How Different Are the Adult Children?"
88. Abraham Kuyper, Near unto God: Daily Meditations Adapted for Contemporary Christians, ed. James C. Schaap (Grand
Rapids: CRC Publications, 1997), 7.
89. Quoted in William Carl Placher, Callings: Twenty Centuries of Christian Wisdom on Vocation (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans,
2005), 264.
90. Abraham Kuyper, Calvinism: Six Stone-Lectures (Princeton, NJ: Princeton Theological Seminary, 1898).
91. William A. Stanmeyer, Clear and Present Danger (Ann Arbor: Servant Books, 1983), 161.
92. These and more examples may be found in Paul Johnson, Intellectuals (New York: Harper and Row, 1988).
93. C.S. Lewis, God in the Dock (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1972), 109-10.
94. Genesis 2:20: "The man gave names to all livestock and to the birds of the heavens and to every beast of the field.
But for Adam there was not found a helper fit for him."
95. 5. D. Gaede, Where Gods May Dwell (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1985), 75-76.
96. For more information, see "What If Jesus Had Never Been Born? Summit Joural 11, no. 12 (December 201l, www
.summit.org/media/journal/2011-12-Summit-Journal.pdf.
97. Matthew 20:16: "The last will be first, and the first last"; Mark 10:43: "It shall not be so among you. But whoever
would be great among you must be your servant; Luke 2-27: "Who is the greater, one who reclines at table or one
who serves? 1s it not the one who reclines at table? But I am among you as the one who serves. "
98. Rodney Stark, For the Glory of God (Princeton, N. Prirer ston University Press, 2003), 291. All Christians should
carefully study the entirety of Stark's chapter 4, "God's Justice: The Sin of Slavery."
99. Rockne McCarthy et al., Society, State, and Schools (Grand Rapids: erdmans, 1932), 151.
100. Acts 17:31: "[God] has fixed a day on which he will judge the world in righteousness by a man whom he has
1opointed; and of this he has given assurance to all by raising him from the dead!"
101. Dietrich Bonhoeffer, Ethics (New York: Macmillan 1959), 207.
103. Francis A. Schaeffer, Death in the City (Downers Grove, IL: Inter Varsity, 1976), 21.
104. Hugh Thomas, The Slave Trade: The Story gel the Atlantic Slave Trade: 1440-1870 (New York: Simon and Schuster
goer Bringing the slave trade to an end was one of the great feats of human history. It was accomplished primarily
by evangelical Christians. "Moreover, within Westerr' emMon, the principal impetus for the aboution of slavery
came first from very conservative religious activists-people who would today be called 'the religious right. Clearly,
two is not 'politically correct' in today's terms. Hence it is ignored, as if it never happened," Thomas Sowell,
Black Rednecks and White Liberals (San Francisco: Encounter Books 2005), 116.
105. Genesis 2:23-25: "The man said, "This at last is k, 3ne of my bones and flesh of my flesh; she shall be called
Woman because she was taken out of Man. Ti leanore a man shall leave his father and his mother and hold fast to
his wife, and they shall become one flesh. And the 1986) and his wife were both naked and were not ashamed.


<!-- page-15 (book p.334) -->

106. Will Durant, The Story of Ciulization, vol. 3, Caesar and Christ (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1944), 598.
107 Matthew 29•29-40: "A second [commandl is like [the first]: You shall love your neighbor as yourself. On thes
two commandments depend all the Law and the Prophets."
108. Francis A. Schaeffer, The Church at the End of the 20th Century (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity, 1974), 73.
109. Matthew 16:18: "I [Jesus) tell you, you are Peter, and on this rock I will build my church, and the gates of hell shall
not prevail against it."
110. Tony Evans, Oneness Embraced (Chicago: Moody, 2011), 251.
11. Aspate of books written in the 1990s made this argument initially: Today, academic research has caught up with
what these authors intuitively understood to be true. For the latest research, see ramilyFacts.org, www.familyfacts.
org. For an in-depth look at the pioneers who raised the alarm, we recommend Dobson and Bauer, Children at Rist;
Phyllis Schlafly, Child Abuse in the Classroom (Alton, IL: Marquette, 1985); Judith A. Reisman and Edward W. ichel,
Kinsey, Sex, and Fraud (Lafayette, LA: Huntington House, 1990); B. K. Bakman, Cloning of the American Mind: Bradicting
Morality through Education (Lafayette, LA: Huntington House, 1998); Allan Bloom, The Closing of the American Mind (New
York: Simon and Schuster, 1987); and Thomas Sowell, Inside American Education: The Decline, the Deception, the Dogmas
(New York: Free Press, 1993).
112. Quoted in D. James Kennedy and Jerry Newcombe, What If Jesus Had Never Been Born? (Nashville: Thomas Nelson,
1994), 238.
