# Chapter 17

<!-- page-1 (book p.17) -->

CHAPTER
HIsToRy J
1. WHAT MAKES GREAT HISTORY?
London, England. The soaring dome of Saint Paul's Cathe-
dral defines the skyline of the north bank of the Thames River.
If you visit, be sure to explore the crypt. It's not as creepy and
dark as it sounds. It is the final resting place of many interesting
people, including naval hero Admiral Lord Nelson and Sir
Christopher Wren, the architect of Saint Paul's. Above Wren's
tomb is an inscription in Latin that reads, "Reader, if you seek
his monument, loom sig ut you. Saint Pauls extravagance bears
witness to Wren's greatnesss.


<!-- page-2 (book p.427) -->

Orange, Virginia. Montpelier is a plantation home not far from Thomas Jefferson's Mon-
ticello. A short hike from the main house is a gravesite where James Madison is buried. Mad.
ison was the father of the Constitution, negotiator of the Louisiana Purchase, and our fourth
president. Madison's monument is honorable but plain. In fact, for more than twenty years
after his death, there was no grave marker at all. According to biographer Richard Brookhiser,
Madison needed no extravagant monument. Brookhiser wrote, "If you seek his monument,
look about you. Madison's circumambient monument is American constitutionalism." Some
great men achieve greatness through works of art or architecture; James Madison achieved
greatness through his ideas.
Why do most historians treat Madison as great? Yes, he was president, but many other
presidents are all but ignored by historians today. Yes, he was present at the constitutional
convention, but so were fifty-four others, and few would
be able to name more than two or three of them. Histo-
History: the study of past
events.
rians study people and events from the past, examining
how they thought and lived. In this chapter well look
at how history has been studied in the past and how it
ought to be studied today. Along the way, we'll look at the approach to history of each of the
six worldviews we have been studying throughout this volume.
2. A PRIMER ON HISTORY
The sun rises and sets, but our organization of days, months, seasons, and years—the fact
that we seek to make the most of our time on this planet-is unique to how humans think.
People are born and people die, but that certain human events are worth remembering-that
these are worth pause, consideration, and reflection-is unique to how humans think.
What people believe about the cause, nature, and purpose of the universe determines
how they understand and use time. Time, then, is inherently religious. Many ancient Greek
philosophers thought everyday events were relatively meaningless. The universe just is— it has
no goal. Some Eastern religions hold this view as well. As G. K. Chesterton once observed, "It
is fitting that the Buddha be pictured with his eyes closed; there is nothing important to see?"
A few ancient Greeks, though, went against the grain. For example, Herodotus is known
wrote about it. Even though some of what he wrote sounds crazy-Arion riding on the tail
as the father of history because of the way he gathered evidence, tested it for accuracy, and
of a dolphin, for instance —he nevertheless inquired into what happened and devised a way
to describe it. His work, then, is considered among the earliest attempts to compose history.
Whereas Herodotus focused on people and places
Herodotus is known
and faithfully recorded what he heard, even if it was
as the father of history
mythical, the historian Thucydides was a bit more sci-
because of the way he
entific. Thucydides omitted from his accounts inter-
gathered evidence, tested
ference from the gods or anything that did not meet
it for accuracy, and wrote
the test of cause and effect. He focused instead on the
about it.
larger picture of why, in light of the political situation,
things happened as they did. Both Herodotus and Thu-
cydides were celebrated by early leaders who thought
them rule more effectively.
the examples of history, especially how great men gained and maintained power, helped
Later, in the medieval and Renaissance periods, history was often recorded in story, song,
poems, and speeches rather than comprehensive narratives. The purpose was different too;
namely, situating people's problems in the larger context of past events to give them a sense
ofidentity.S
Another group of careful historians was the ancient Hebrews. University of Liverpools
Kenneth Anderson Kitchen describes their accurate record keeping: "In terms of general re-
liability ... the Old Testament comes out remarkably well, so long as its writings and writers
are treated fairly and evenhandedly, in line with independent data, open to all. Oddly, secular
scholars seem to discount these narratives. Rhetoric scholar Kenneth Burke, a non-Christian,
thought they were wrong to do so. He laid the blame at the feet of "parochial-minded persons"
who "dismiss all thought before a certain date as ignorance and superstition? Because we
think too much of our current knowledge, Burke thought, as a way of self-correcting, we
should cherish the lore of history, even that which modern people think was in error.
Today, the study of history is in trouble for two reasons. First, there are massive disagree-
ments about what makes historical people and events important. Why, for example, should we
focus on presidents? With one exception, they were all white men. What about women? What
about people of color? Aren't they also important? And who is to say that only our leaders are
important? Sometimes everyday people do something to affect the course of history. If were
looking only at elected officials, wealthy people, or "winners, we'll miss those other stories.
Furthermore, choosing what to study from history is complicated because it is impossible
to take into account all the facts. A fact is something known to exist in reality. Past events are
known to us through facts. For example, the Continental Congress adopted the Declaration of
Independence on July 4, 1776. Abraham Lincoln died on April 15, 1865. The Japanese attacked
Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941.
Historians, however, can't take into account every
single fact. They have to discern carefully which facts had
ashaping influence. And who decides which facts had a
Fact: something
that is indisputably
known to be true.
shaping influence? Historian and Marxist sympathizer
E. Hallet Carr thought it was impossible to say:
It used to be said that facts speak for themselves. This is, of course, untrue. The facts
speak only when the historian calls on them: it is he who decides to which facts to
give the floor and in what order or context.... It is the historian who has decided for
his own reasons that Caesar's crossing of that petty stream, the Rubicon, is a fact of
history, whereas the crossing of the Rubicon by millions of other people before or
since interests nobody at all.®
The way Carr used the word fact is confusing, The historian who pays attention to Julius
Caesar's crossing of the Rubicon is not merely making a "petty stream" seem more importan
than it was: rather hes respondine to a reality from history that Roman armies were expected
to disband before crossing the Rubicon on their wav home. Caesar's failure to disband was
immediately seen as a declaration of civil war, exactly as he intended. The crossing of the
Rubicon was a point of no return. Today it enters the discussion in many meaningful ways,
including whether America should forsake its tradition of not using its national army as a


<!-- page-3 (book p.429) -->

History is not relative; it is rigorous. As Nancy Isenberg says, "History is not a bedtime
story. It is a comprehensive engagement with often obscure documents and books no longer
rend _booke chelved in old archives and fragile pamphlets contemporaneous with the sub-
ject under study-all of which reflect a world view not ours. Some find this kind of study
fascinating. Others are bored by it or don't see the point. The industrialist Henry Ford said,
"I don't know much about history, and I wouldn't give a
nickel for all the history in the world." We may not enjoy
The call goes out to
smart Christians to make
history their vocation not
for fame or riches but
to vividly tell the story
of what God is doing
through flawed people in
order to accomplish his
grand purposes.
everything about the study of history, but we ought to
try. Knowing history is part of understanding the times
so we can know what we ought to do.
Today, history is being hijacked in the service of
anti-Christian worldviews. The call goes out to smart
Christians to make history their vocation not for fame
or riches but to vividly tell the story of what God is
doing through flawed people in order to accomplish his
grand purposes. It is a call to battle to advance truth and
also to guard against the flanking maneuvers of error.
The second reason the study of history is in trouble is because people use it to achieve
their own agendas rather than as part of the search for truth. The writers of Scripture seemed
to do their best to "tell" on themselves, to reveal unflattering details about themselves. This is
uncharacteristic of people who are trying to amass personal power. One example is Peter in
the Gospels, who, in the account he sourced for the gospel of Mark, told of his missteps and
follies, including how women often understood the truth when men did not (this in an age
when women were not even considered to be reliable witnesses in court). Like those writers,
historians should be prepared to make accurate arguments and offer genuine proof for them.
Christianity is based in history. The biblical authors were saying, "Here are the facts
about what actually happened as God worked and continues to work in the lives of people
from the beginning of time to the present and on into the future." The past matters. What
people did then shows us what to do and what not to do now. Often the hero and villain in
biblical narratives are the same person, honoring God in one season of life and dishonoring
him in another. Taken as a whole, the Christian narrative of history has profoundly shaped
all of Western civilization."
3. WHAT DO HISTORIANS DO?
In Philosophy of History, GeorgE. W. Hegel wrote, "What experience and history teach
is this—that people and governments never have learned anything from history, or acted or
principles deduced from it?" For Hegel, to study history was to interpret the past in order
to establish a story of how life is, which then justifies our vision of the future.
Using history to justify our course may sound reasonable, but it can be dangerous. His-
torians can't know every fact about the past. Even if they could, their accounts of those fact
would be incomprehensibly difficult to read. So historians select facts they think are relevant
and discard those they deem irrelevant. All of this is affected by their worldview. John H.
Arnold, former professor of history at the University of East Anglia, admits, "As historians,
the world works, and why people do the things they do "13
we are caught up in our own bundles of interests, morals, ethics, philosophies, ideas on how
The Marxist historian E. Hallet Carr took it even further. We do history, he said, "to in-
crease man's understanding of, and mastery over, his environment." + By this way of thinking,
historical facts not fitting the narrative we want to establish are seen as detective and thus
useless Even the conservative Oxford professor Michael Oakeshott auestioned whether ob-
jectivity was possible. "History is the historian's experience,' he said. "It is 'made by nobody
sare the historian: to write history is the only way of making it 15
Historians all have biases. but does this mean all accounts of history are therefore false?
Not necessarily. "History" said the respected Hungarian historian John Lukacs, "is the remem
bered past, meaning all that we remember of the past, in
every possible way, the corollary of this being that the
entire past of mankind is history, at least potentially so."16
He's right. The historian should only say "how it really
was" as Leopold von Ranke phrased it.? The reader of
Historians all have biases,
but does this mean all
accounts of history
are therefore false?
the historian's work must be discerning about whether
the historian is remembering what really happened or
merely what he wants to have happened. Historians should be prepared to reveal their un-
derlying assumptions to readers, and readers should be prepared to see how the historians
treatment of the facts stacks up to what else is known. Only when readers engage in this way
with the historians can history be properly grasped.
The writing of history is called historiography. Historiography is what historians do.
They look at past events and reconstruct what happened in their minds so as to communi-
cate it to their audiences. Historians have ten tools to work with, according to Hans Mey-
eroff: subject matter, facts, primary aim, language, fact/theory/interpretation, methods,
explanations, freedom, values, and meaning. Using these tools, Carr claimed, creates an
unending dialogue between the past and present." 18
There is one more key term you need to know:
historicism. Historicism is when historians go beyond
the writing of history and project an interpretation of
history onto the future. Karl Popper defined historicism
as "an approach to the social sciences which assumes
that historical prediction is their only aim, and which
Historiography:
the writing of history
or the study of the
methodology historians
use to reconstruct
historical events.
assumes that this aim is attainable by discovering the
Frythms or the patterns; the laws' or the 'trends that
underlie the evolution of history!
According to Popper's definition, seeing history
25 progress from lower to higher states is historicism
because it makes further progress appear inevitable
(usually in the direction the historian himself thinks
we should go). To see history only as class warfare also
counts as historicism because it makes class warfare
Historicism: the writing
of history for the purpose
of making certain future
states appear to be
inevitable, thus projecting
an interpretation of history
onto the future.
seem inevitable. Not everyone, of course, finds Popper s


<!-- page-4 (book p.431) -->

definition of historicism so clear cut. Carr criticized Popper for using historicism "as a
catch-all for any opinion about history which he dislikes."2 Whether Carr said this as a
historian or as a Marxist is unclear.
Still, most historians find historicism suspicious. Dutch philosopher Herman Doove-
weerd thought historicism dangerous because it promotes relativism in the sense that what
we count as "true" depends on what we want to be true. It also promotes determinism, the
idea that we are ruled by an inescapable fate. " Herbert Schlossberg concurs. Today, he says,
We are captive to a way of thinking that "dismisses history as a subject of study land] exal (s)
it as a principle of inevitability. You do not control your
life... but are subject to fate or to the inexorable powers
Determinism: the belief
that all events, including
human actions, are the
inevitable and necessary
results of previous actions.
that control the universe."22
Historicism is a powerful tool in the hands of those
who crave power and is usually employed for unjust
purposes. Using history to argue that your view is inevi-
table and that opponents should just step aside is deeply
immoral. It's like trying to win the debate for truth by
canceling the debate altogether, or like preposting the score on the scoreboard and then
claiming to have won the basketball game.
So there are proper and improper ways to study history. This means understanding a
worldview's philosophy of history is just as important as understanding its interpretation of
historical events. We'll focus on both but with greater emphasis on how each worldview's
underlying assumptions cause it to look at history in a particular way and thus demand that
the world fall in line with its conclusions.
4. SECULARISM
The basic Secularist assumption regarding history can be summed up in one phrase: social
progress. Most Westerners sense things getting better over time. We might not like the direc-
tion our political leaders are moving, but we do expect the next generation of smartphonesto
be an improvement on the last. We observe urban areas decaying, but we also expect medica
treatments to advance through time. If we take the long view of history, there are many periods
of progression toward greater wealth and better technolov. How to sustain these trends is
one reason we study history. As Herbert Butterfield said in The Whig Interpretation of History,
our study can reveal how historical events morally and/or substantively contributed to or
detracted from our present state? History can guide us
Social Progress: the
belief that society will
continually improve
through human initiative.
to learn from our mistakes, act rightlv in our current
circumstances, and get better over time.
But Secularism is dedicated to human progress for
entirely different reasons. The Secularists we've studied
believe history to be the evolution of both organisms
and human society-from the simple to the complex,
from weaker to stronger. Progress is inevitable. Charles S. Peirce thought the "laws of nature
are themselves evolved as the universe moves from a chaotic spontaneity toward perfect
order""^ Bertrand Russell, the atheist British philosopher, said that technology will guide us in
harnessing these laws to our own purposes: "Science used to be valued as a means of getting
to know the world; now, owing to the triumph of technique, it is conceived as showing how
to change the world!"" As we progress, our ideas also evolve. Julian Huxley said, "Major steps
in the human phase of evolution are achieved by breakthroughs to new dominant patterns
of mental organization, of knowledge, ideas and beliefs-ideological instead of physiological
or biological organization. For Huxley, holding progressive ideas is a sign of a person's
advanced evolutionary state.
The idea of progress built into the laws of nature—or perhaps the idea of progress as a
law of nature-can be traced back to Herbert Spencer, a contemporary of Charles Darwin.
Spencer enthusiastically embraced evolution because he thought it explained why certain
races are more advanced than others and why certain classes within those races were superior.
History, Spencer thought, reveals a necessary progression from homogeneity (sameness) to
heterogeneity (variety), from lower and simpler states of organization to higher and more
complex states of organization. Progress is "not an accident, not a thing within human control,
but a beneficent necessity."2
Although most people today recoil at Spencer's patently racist and elitist arguments,2&
he was not alone in holding such views. Darwin claimed to not apply his theories to human
society but still put the subtitle of Origin of Species as The Preservation of Favored Races in
the Struggle for Life. While frowning on Spencer's and Darwin's racism, Secularists still en-
thusiastically embrace the underlying argument that society will "evolve" in the direction
smart people think it should go. This unbounded optimism underlies the original defining
document of Secularism, the Humanist Manifesto I (1933).
Nazism and Marxism temporarily frustrated Secularists' infatuation with progress. How
could leaders like Hitler and Stalin, who also enthusiastically embraced the inevitability of
human progress, act so inhumanely? Their brutality made a farce of optimism. The tone of the
Humanist Manifesto II (published in 1973) is noticeably more subdued than its predecessor:
"Nazism has shown the depths of brutality of which humanity is capable. Other totalitar-
ian regimes have suppressed human rights without ending poverty. Science has sometimes
brought evil as well as good!
As they entered the 1960s, Secularists seemed to suffer from a collective sense of depres-
sion. P. W. Atkins, an Oxford chemist, phrased it well: "We are the children of chaos, and the
deep structure of change is decay. At root, there is only corruption, and the unstemmable
tide of chaos. Gone is purpose; all that is left is direction" Bertrand Russell moaned, "The
universe is vast and men are but tiny specks on an insignificant planet.".!
But where some saw only bleakness, others saw dignity. Chaos may reign, but the brave
mock fate and press on. The playwright Albert Camus imagined humans in the place of
Sisyphus, the man in Greek mythology condemned to forever roll a boulder up a hill, only
to have it roll down again. Camus cast Sisyphus not merely as the victim of absurdity but
as a tragic hero who accepted his fate with scorning determination. Of course, his task was
absurd, but he mocked the gods by remaining happy. Camus said, "Happiness and the absurd
are two sons of the same earth" that "drive out of this world a god who had come into it with
dissatisfaction and a preference for futile sufferings. It makes of fate a human matter, which
must be settled among men?"


<!-- page-5 -->

If life is an accident, then le's smile and make the best of it, Secularists say. As Athos
proclaimed in Alexander Dumass Three Musketeers, "Eh, gentlemen, let us reckon upon
accidents! Life is a chaplet of little miseries, which the philosopher unstrings with a smile"
Out of chaos we form our own meaning. "No deity will save us; we must save ourselves?
says the Humanist Manifesto I1." Corliss Lamont went
even further: "Humanism assigns to man nothing less
If life is an accident, then
let's smile and make the
best of it, Secularists say.
than the task of being his own savior and redeemer"34
We are messiahs, Erich Fromm thought, on the cusp
of a new stage in history: "The messianic time is the next
step in history, not its abolition. The messianic time is
the time when man will have been fully born. When man was expelled from Paradise he lost
his home; in the messianic time he will be at home again — in the world."3 As messiahs, the
Humanist Manifesto IT hints, we can even perform acts bordering on the miraculous: "Using
technology wisely, we can control our environment, conquer poverty, markedly reduce disease,
extend our life-span, significantly modify our behavior, alter the course of human evolution
and cultural development, unlock vast new powers, and provide humankind with unparalleled
opportunity for achieving an abundant and meaningful life."36
If you sense a contradiction between believing our course to be determined and claiming
freedom to shape our course as we see fit, you're not alone. The esteemed historian Sir Isaiah
Berlin said, "If the determinist hypothesis were true and adequately accounted for the actual
world... the notion of human responsibility, as ordinarily understood, would no longer apply
to any actual, but only to imaginary or conceivable, states of affairs.". And yet we are respon-
sible. Corliss Lamont attempted to explain the contradiction by saying, "Within certain limits
prescribed by our earthly circumstances and by scientific law, individual human beings, entire
nations, and mankind in general are free to choose the paths that they truly wish to follow.
To a significant degree they are the molders of their own fate and hold in their own hands the
shape of things to come?"38
Bertrand Russell was quite defensive when confronted with this contradiction between
determinism and free will.It is actually the idea of supernatural truth that is to blame for
our predicament, he thought, because it makes Secularists feel "robbed of personality, futie,
unimportant, the slaves of circumstance, unable to vary
Free Will: the belief that
human beings have the
capacity to voluntarily
choose a course of action
from among various
alternatives.
in the slightest degree the part assigned to them by nature
from the very beginning"" This defensiveness, combined
with a messiah complex, may explain why Secularists
are so intent on discounting the Bible as historically in-
accurate-especially its historical account of Christ's
resurrection and ascension.4°
What comes next, according to Secularists? Victor
J. Stenger thought technology will enable the continued
evolution of humans to even higher states of being, This new evolution will not come about
"by the painfully slow and largely random process of biological evolution," he said, but
through the rapid and guided advances of technology. "This new form of 'life' I will call, for
historical reasons, the computer"4! Stenger believed that computers will eventually prove more
capable than humans in every meaningful realm of life, saying, "If there is anything we do
that computers cannot, be patient. In time they will do it better, if it is worth doing at all!?
Richard Carrier actually ends his book Sense and Goodness without God with a chapter
tiled "The Secular Humanist's Heaven?" He says that one of the first orders of business will
happen that, in the fullness of time, we will be able to transfer our minds, by transferring the
be to abolish death or, as he puts it, "We might even make immortality possible. It may even
patterns of our brains, into computer-simulated worlds that are in even more perfect regulation
than the physical world, a true paradise.... It is possible it will never die"43
As we can see, history is not only about the past for the Secularist. It aims for a future
heaven on earth. We are our own saviors, and we are redeeming ourselves. In spite of some
setbacks— the plague, global wars, and so on—we are moving ever closer to perfection.
When Secularists speak of human beings controlling their own evolution, they aren't
talking about all humans. They're talking about people they believe "get it." These elites will
embrace Secularist assumptions about God, nature, and humans. They are what C. S. Lewis
called "the Conditioners" If nothing supernatural exists, then humans "are mere nature to
be kneaded and cut into new shapes for the pleasures of masters who must, by hypothesis,
have no motive but their own 'natural' impulses..... It is not that they are bad men. They are
not men at all[;] ... they have stepped into the void." 4
5. MARXISM
Recall the idea of dialectical materialism: Marxists borrowing Hegel's dialectic, which
frames all of history in terms of thesis, antithesis, and synthesis. Unlike Hegel's dialectic,
though, the Marxist idea is materialistic, which means it assumes that matter is all that exists.
According to this theory, nature guides society through certain economic phases in a constant
upward spiral: from primitive communism to slavery to feudalism to capitalism to socialism
and then to communism. The continued clash of the bourgeoisie (the present thesis) with the
proletariat (the present antithesis) will lead society through a transitional phase of socialism
and finally-when the clash is resolved—communism will be achieved. This theory is called
historical materialism.
History, for the Marxist, is the account of matter in motion. God has nothing to do with it.
Matter obeys specific laws in the universe, particularly the laws of the dialectic, which declare
that economic structures will eventually evolve into communism. And from communism,
the perfect societal superstructure will arise. This alone is the source of progress in the world
The laws of the dialectic, according to Maurice
Cornforth, are economic in nature: "Historical devel-
opment is not determined by the personal decisions of
public men, but by the movement of classes?4 V. I. Lenin
put it this way: "According to the theory of socialism,
Le, of Marxism... the real driving force of history is the
revolutionary class struggle? The dialectic, according
to Marxists, carries the force of natural law just as does
the law of gravity. It is the only thing that matters. Jo-
Historical Materialism:
the belief that society is
guided by nature through
progressive socioeconomic
phases: tribalism, slavery,
feudalism, capitalism,
socialism, and ultimately
communism.
seph Stalin asserted, "The practical activity of the party
- 402.


<!-- page-6 -->

of the proletariat must not be base ay fo the good wishes of outstanding individuals, not on
the dictates of "reason, universal morals, etc, but on the laws of development of society and
on the study of these laws."47
Marxists are absolutely convinced the dialectical laws will lead to a perfect communist
society. As with Secularism, the specter of historical inevitability rises in Marxism too, ac-
cording to Lenin: "Communists should know that the future belongs to them.... In all cases
and in all countries communism is becoming steeled and is spreading(;) its roots are so deep
that persecution does not weaken it, does not debilitate it, but strengthens it." 48
If everything is completely determined, then it wouldn't really matter what humans do,
since they can't "choose" to do anything. Because Marxists need action that leads to revolution,
they developed a limited version of free will, distinguishing between being totally free and
being free within the constraints of history. Karl Marx wrote, "Men make their own history,
but they do not make it just as they please; they do not make it under circumstances chosen
by themselves, but under circumstances directly encountered, given and transmitted from
The freedom to pursue not their own wills but the laws of the proletariat is important to
Marxists for a simple reason: if people are free to do what they want, they are free to resist
revolution as well as to foment it. Marxists' firm conviction is that no amount of human
will can stop the collapse of capitalism, the rise of socialism, and the steady transition
from socialism to communism. Maurice Conforth
declared, "From the point of view of the capitalist class,
Marxists' firm conviction
is that no amount of
human will can stop the
collapse of capitalism, the
rise of socialism, and the
steady transition from
socialism to communism.
Marx's theory is certainly 'fatalistic. It says: You cannot
contrive a managed capitalism, you cannot do away
with the class struggle, and you cannot keep the system
going indefinitely"50
How does the Marxist view of the laws of the dia-
lectic affect the way it studies history? First, Marxists
call into question the objectivity of all other views of
history. Howard Zinn, a Marxist historian, was even
more blunt: "Objectivity is impossible and it is also undesirable... because if you have any
kind of a social aim ... then it requires that you make your selection on the basis of what you
think will advance causes of humanity."51
Zinn certainly had a social aim, and it is worth examining closely because his book A
Peoplés History of the United States is a popular history textbook in universities today. Zinn
reinterpreted the events of Americ's founding from a class- Warfare perspective in an inten-
tionally controversial way. For example, Zinn portrayed the founding of the United States as
"diabolically creative way to ensure oppression. Zin seemed fairly uninterested in whether
his telling of history was consistent with previous historical work. His book contains not
single footnote to source or add credibility to his arguments.
Second, having called into question the objectivity of other views, Marxists insist on
considering their own views to be objectively true. To the Marxist, writing history is a forn
of what Kenneth Burke called "secular prayer," or interpreting events in order to highlight
certain words and feelings, coaching the reader into seeing and believing what the Marxis
sees and believes. This, of course, includes class struggle
and driving the audience into a corner by eliminating all
other possible explanations for this but the Marxist one, 53
Marxists view history from the standpoint of athe-
ism, dialectical materialism, and naturalism. The dialec-
tic is a law of nature guaranteeing the movement away
Having called into
question the objectivity
of other views, Marxists
insist on considering
their own views to be
objectively true.
from capitalism toward a communist utopia. Human
beings cannot stop this process, but they can catalyze it
through revolutionary activity. Only people who act in concert with the laws of the dialectic
will have impact. The task of the historian is to organize facts about the past to show the
futility of prolonging capitalism. History is fixed, like a rigged boxing match. We can cheer
all we want, but the boxer paid to "take a dive" is going to lose. We might as well clap and
stomp for the predetermined winner-communism-encouraging him to win the bout more
decisively. Capitalism will die. The bourgeoisie will collapse. Marxism will win. As Karl Marx
himself phrased it, "History is the judge—its executioner, the proletarian."54
6. POSTMODERNISM
Traditional historians sift through the evidence at hand to reconstruct as accurate a
view of past events as they can. They may differ in their interpretations, but they discipline
themselves to be as truthful as possible. When new information comes to light, they take it
into account by revising or supplementing their narratives to reflect truth more accurately.
Objectivity is a genuine goal.
Postmodernists not only think objectivity is impossible, but they even call into question
the idea of "facts." Alasdair MacIntyre even says "facts, as a means of directly knowing about
reality itself, "like telescopes and wigs for gentlemen, were a seventeenth-century invention."5s
All historical accounts are fiction, many Postmodernists says Less radical Postmod-
ernists take a soft view of history as fiction, saying history is what we make of it. Historical
facts are inaccessible, so historians reconstruct the past based on their ideological bent. Some
more radical Postmodernists see no ultimate purpose in history, advocating nihilism instead
(nihil is Latin for "nothing" — nihilism means "a belief
As you will remember from previous chapters, Post-
modernists deny that universal truth can be known.
Thus they believe historians are fooling themselves and
their readers by striving for objectivity. Each culture and
each historical period has its own social system through
which it generates its own norms. External truth does not
exist. No one outside of a particular culture or historical
period can really understand it. Umberto Ecos novel
The Name of the Rose sums up the postmodern point
of view nicely. After a long, logical search for truth, the
detective character concludes, "There was no plot ...
and I discovered it by mistake?s?
Postmodernists not
only think objectivity is
impossible, but they
even call into question
the idea of "facts."
Nihilism: the view that the
world and human existence
are without meaning,
purpose, comprehensible
truth, or essential value.
- 4:30 -


<!-- page-7 (book p.437) -->

But Postmodernists say we can use deconstruction to show that the work of historians
is not obiective and how they are unwittingly operating in the service of so-called universal
truths that secure power for the elite and oppress everyone else. Hayden White, in his book
Metahistory (meta meaning "beyond") purports to show
how we can deconstruct historians motives by analyz-
Deconstruction: a method
of literary analysis that
questions the ability of
language to represent
reality adequately and
seeks to discern and expose
the purported underlying
ideologies of a text.
ing the literary structures they use in their craft The
"metacode" historians use, White argues, will reveal how
historians get us to believe in "a human universal on the
basis of which trans-cultural messages about the shared
reality can be transmitted."59
At the end of the day, scholars like White aren't
showing how to do history. They re trying to show how
to undo it. Michel Foucault took a similar approach.
Mark Poster observes, "Foucault offers a new way of
thinking about history, writing history and deploying history in current political strug-
gles. Foucault is an anti-historian, one who in writing history, threatens every canon of
the craft."60
For Foucault, "truth" and "knowledge" were tools of power. If we accept others' claims to
know the truth, were just giving them power over us. This is why Foucault thought history was
a fiction —it is a way to organize arguments we cannot
know to be true that lead the reader to conclusions we
For Foucault, "truth" and
"knowledge" were tools of
power. If we accept others'
claims to know the truth,
we're just giving them
power over us.
wish them to reach. Foucault didn't even exempt himself
from this criticism:
I am well aware that I have never written anything
but fictions. I do not mean to say, however, that truth
is therefore absent. It seems to me that the possibility
exists for fiction to function in truth, for a fictional
discourse to induce effects of truth, and for bringing
it about that a true discourse engenders or "manufactures" something that does not
as yet exist, that it "fictions" it. One "fictions" history on the basis of a political reality
that makes it true, one "fictions" a politics not yet in existence on the basis of a his-
torical truth."l
This wordplay shows what Foucault actually meant when he used the word truth. Truth
is not an inherent qualitv of historical arguments: it's only an impression people get when
If objective truth and knowledge are not possible, then what should historians do? On
this point Foucault was explicitly clear: the historian is to look back into the past to see how
those in power have used historical arguments to secure their power:
The intellectual no longer has to play the role of an advisor. The project, tactics and
goals to be adopted are a matter for those who do the fighting. What the intellectual can
do is to provide instruments of analysis, and at present this is the historian's essential
role. What's effectively needed is a ramified, penetrative perception of the present, one
that makes it possible to locate lines of weakness, strong points, positions where the
instances of power have secured and implanted themselves by a system of organization
dating back over 150 years.®2
If the Postmodernist is so suspicious about the way historical arguments have "secured
and implanted" power, one would think Postmodernists would attack Marxists and Secularists
with frenzy. The reality, though, is that Postmodernism is a sort of grandchild of Marxism.
As Jacques Derrida admitted, his deconstruction was a radicalization "within the tradition
of a certain Marxism, in a certain spirit of Marxism."63 Postmodernists are likely to protect
their Marxist grandparent, or even incorporate some of his assumptions, in turning the guns
on other worldviews, such as Christianity.
Marxism's parenthood of Postmodernism is clearest in the trend toward historical revi-
sionism. Analyzing history in order to see how some unjustly wrest power from others doesn't
just happen in economics. It happens in race relations, gender relations, and in every other
area where the powerful oppress the weak, the different, the alienated. Gene Veith explains:
Post-Marxist radicalism constructs new revolutionary ideologies by replacing Marx's
concern for the oppressed working class with other oppressed groups (blacks, women,
gays). Status and moral legitimacy come from being "excluded from power." The victim
has the favored role.... To be black, female or gay is
to enjoy a sort of secular sainthood. But even these
categories are segmenting into ever-smaller sects of
victimhood. 4
Postmodernists have blown up the idea of objec-
Historical Revisionism:
the act of reinterpreting
the past to serve an
ideological purpose.
tive historical study and from its rubble have instead
assigned to oppressed social minorities the responsibility
ofbuilding new historical methods. Some feminist historians, for example, think men cannot
write histories of women because men simply cannot understand women-that is, masculine
ideologies would oppress feminine ideologies. Feminist histories are needed, feminists say,
to attempt to expose a male-dominated, patriarchal past and point the way for empowering
women. Every repressed group, including minorities, ethnicities, nationalities, and sexualities,
has an injustice that must be exposed, and this calls for revolution against the established order.
Tom Dixon writes, "Social historians are often driven by activist goals. Historical research
becomes not an attempt to understand the past but a propaganda tool for use in modern
political and social power struggles."65 Dixon also notes, "Postmodern cultural historians
consider bias unavoidable in whole or even in part. As a result we see a growing willingness
to arrange and edit facts in a way that supports the message of particular historians"66
As you can imagine, the postmodern approach to history is controversial. No one doubts
whether powerful people abuse their power, but does this really mean objective history is
impossible to ascertain? Without any sort of standard for what counts as truth and knowl-
edge, stories of abuse are just tales told by some culture about itself and thus meaningless
for everyone else. If it didn't happen to us or in our culture, we are not even really capable of
understanding it or caring about it. Rewriting history to highlight the stories of the oppressed
not only fails to help the oppressed, but it blurs the line between remembering the past
and revising it. Further, the revisionist approach does little to draw society together toward


<!-- page-8 (book p.439) -->

harmonious civility. It engenders a new tribalism, pitting every group against the other in a
game of one-upmanship: Whose claim to victimhood is greater?
So. Secularists look for evolutionary progress, Marxists anticipate the inevitable move
toward pure communism, and the Postdodernist view or history is distinctly ateleological
(i.e., without a purpose. For most Esistmodernists, there are no "facts." There are onl
various degrees of fiction.
7. NEW SPIRITUALITY
The New Spiritualist trusts spiritual evolution to guide humanity unswervingly toward
perfection. In a very real sense, members of the New Spiritualist movement place their faith in
evolution as humanity's savior. Marilyn Ferguson said, "For the first time in history, human-
kind has come upon the control panel of change—an understanding of how transformation
occurs. We are living in the change of change, the time in which we can intentionally align
ourselves with nature for rapid remaking of ourselves and our collapsing institutions 68
To the New Spiritualist, all that really exists is consciousness. This is no magical or mys-
tical realm; rather, this is what the real universe is. For the New Spiritualist, tapping into this
reality is a scientific undertaking. The Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, inventor of Transcendental
Meditation (TM), put it this way:
History does not record a time when man was free from suffering, and so life was de-
clared a struggle. "Life is a struggle" —it's a very common axiom in English. But now a
new time has come for the world, and it is a scientific phenomenon we are witnessing.
I's not impractical idealism we are talking about, high-sounding moral values with
no basis. This is something that has been verified subjectively by millions of people,
something that has been verified objectively by ... hundreds of experiments. It is a
technology, like the use of a lever, to do something previously found impossible. 59
The Maharishi believed if enough people would learn Transcendental Meditation and
practice it together, we could move to a time and place where suffering will be a thing of the
How is it possible for lots of pable move pping into their higher consciousness to change
the world? Shakti Gawain explains: "Eve y individual's consciousness is connected to, and is
a part of, the mass consciousness. When a reall but significant number of individuals have
moved into a new level of awarenesr. and significantly changed their behavior, that change is
felt in the entire mass consciousness"° According to New Spiritualists, we need to realize out
true power to accelerate evolution. Da®d Spangler describes this as the "individuals sense
of being a co-creator with history, of being involved in
Evolutionary Godhood:
the belief that we are
progressing through
history toward the ultimate
goal of realizing our
own divinity.
a process of conscious and participatory evolution""
We use the term evolutionary godhood to describe the
view that as we arise from darkness through our growing
understanding of consciousness, we begin to see our true
potential as gods. As Marianne Williamson states, "When
love reaches a critical mass, when enough people become
miracle-minded, the world will experience a radical shift
History, then, from a New Spiritualist view, is sort of like the Secularist idea of evolu-
tionary progress, but on hyperdrive. New Spiritualist evolution moves from being material
and natural to being spiritual. Benjamin Ferencz and Ken Keyes explain: "We have seen that
humankind is not simply moving in a vicious killing circle; it is on an upward climb toward
completing the governmental structure of the world. We are inspired by our great progress
toward planethood "73
Ferencz, Keyes, and other New Spiritualist writers take pains to note that this is not sci-
ence fiction. Their optimism is "justified by the facts.7* Indeed, physicist Paul Davies shared
this optimism: "Far from sliding towards a featureless state, the Universe is progressing from
featurelessness to states of greater organization and complexity. This cosmic progress defines
a global arrow of time that points in the opposite way to the thermodynamic arrow"*5
If new, higher states of being can solve our problems as humans, then there really is no
point in understanding history except to name the dogmas we have outgrown. New Spiritualists
claim that Christianity, for example, was helpful at a certain time in the past, but we have out-
grown it. Joseph Campbell said, "The old-time religion belongs to another age, another people,
another set of human values, another universe. By going back you throw yourself out of sync
with history.? The theistic religions in particular-Judaism, Christianity, and Islam-"have
disqualified themselves for the future," according to Campbell." Religion is part of the baggage
we must leave behind to speed our way to the mountaintop of human potential.
Christianity is no longer relevant, let alone true, say New Spiritualists in advocating
their viewpoint as the only appropriate religion for our modern age, and it alone can foster
our evolutionary leap into higher consciousness. To make matters worse, Christianity is
sexist too. Eckhart Tolle's philosophy of history is the story of the male form dominating the
female form, which is what led to the Inquisition and witch burning. "Males who denied the
feminine even within themselves were now running the world, a world that was totally out
of balance. The rest is history, or rather a case history of insanity?
In his book The Road Less Traveled, bestselling author M. Scott Peck said, "God wants us
to become Himself (or Herself or Itself. We are growing toward godhood. God is the goal of
evolution. It is God who is the source of the evolutionary force and God who is the destination.
This is what we mean when we say that He is the Alpha and the Omega, the beginning and
the end"") According to A Course in Miracles, every person will eventually be absorbed into a
"Divine Abstract" where there are "no distinctions, where no words are communicated, and
Where there are no events-only a static, eternal now.
Some members of the New Spiritualist movement, unsatisfied with the concept of evolu-
tion as the redemptive force in history, look for an actual savior to guide humanity to higher
consciousness. Donald H. Yott suggests that a "Savior appears every two thousand years
(more or less) for the different ages. Each Savior brings the tone or key-note for the age"
A spirit channeled by Levi H. Dowling proclaimed, "In the ages to come, man will attain to
greater heights. And then, at last, a mighty Master Soul will come to earth to light the way
up to the throne of perfect man."*2
Biological evolution has given us ous present state, according to New Spiritualists, but
only spiritual evolution will get us to the next state. Lest we become apathetic and lazy,
they say, we must see how our own actions could speed the process along if we would leave


<!-- page-9 (book p.441) -->

behind our beliefs about what is true, good, and beautiful and work harder at tapping into
the higher consciousness.
8. ISLAM
Islam is going to win the war of ideas, said Islamic scholar Muhammad Qutb: "slam is
the only future hope of humanity, and its victorious emergence out of the present ideological
warfare is the only guarantee of man's salvation.*3 If this
Biological evolution has
sounds familiar, it is because Islam, like most of the other
worldviews we have considered, carries with it a sense of
given us our present
state, according to New
historical inevitability. But unlike Secularism, Marxism, or
Spiritualists, but only
New Spirituality, this view is not held based on what the
spiritual evolution will get
Islamic worldview hopes to have happen in the future but
us to the next state.
on what has happened in the past. Hammudah Abdalati
explained: "The world is a becoming entity, created by
the will of a Designer and sustained by Him for meaningful purposes. Historical currents take
place in accordance with His will and follow established laws. They are not directed by blind
chance, nor are they random and disorderly incidents?"84
The term pan-Islam best captures the essence of the Islamic approach to history. The global
Islamic state is the destination of all people. Jihad, the Muslim equivalent of evangelism, is the
vehicle. Historical arguments are fuel in the tank, providing the combustion Islamists need to
fire the imaginations of Muslims around the world and
inspire them to work together for this great cause. As we
Pan-Islam: the belief
that all Muslims should
be united under a single
Islamic state or that the
world should be united
under a global Islamic state.
have seen in this volume, most Muslims express a moderate
view, in which the aggressive nature of Islamic teaching and
practice has been curbed by such realities as the Western
value of civic tolerance and pluralism. Yet there are still
a significant number of Muslims, perhaps hundreds of
millions, whom we would call Islamists. They believe all
humanity will one day bow to Allah freely or by force.
As we have seen in previous chapters, Islamic countries are among the most vociferous
persecutors of Christians, presenting probably the greatest missionary challenge to the church
and exhibiting the most prominent external threat to the biblical values of freedom, justice,
and order. Most Christians are not aware of this or of Islam's plans for dramatic expansion.
When they do become aware, they feel helpless to respond There is an urgent need for
Christians to thoughtfully and prayerfully study Islam, explore how to respond in grace and
love, and be prepared to vigilantly defend the truth.8?
We can see the aims of Islam, but what exactly is the view of history it holds to justify its
aggressive movement toward a global Islamic state? There are two answers to this question,
both requiring insight into some subtle aspects of Muslim theology. First, because of its un-
derstanding of Allah's nature and character. Islam freely pursues its aims without fear of social
sanction or regard to what other worldviews deem possible. Unlike Marxism, which sees the
dialectic as a law of nature inevitably bringing about communism. Islam places natural laws
in the character of Allah himself, not as part of his creation.
Second, because Allah does not follow natural laws, Muslims are not obligated to understand
the world or to use their minds to have dominion over it. According to Muslim and historian
Caesar E. Farah, Muslim philosophy is similar to Greek philosophy, which, as we saw earlier,
did not think much of history or science, because what is really real is the ideal. Islam, Farah
wrote, sought to "assimilate rather than to generate, with the conscious striving to adapt the
results of Greek thinking to Muslim philosophical conceptions" The Muslim view of history,
then, is quite different from the others we have studied. It does not ask its followers to imagine
a fanciful utopia to come. It demands obedience to God, who is working his will in the world.
To some, this may sound very similar to the Christian worldview. But the Christian view of
incarnation sets Christianity apart in what we think is a very compelling way.
9. CHRISTIANITY
From the Christian perspective, history is an epic unfolding of God's ultimate plan for
all humanity. Knowing that God has been active throughout history helps us understand
our own roles in the day-to-day history of our lives. "It is always a 'Now," wrote Herbert
Butterfield, "that is in direct relation to eternity—not a far future."90
For the Christian, history is not wrapped around certain philosophies of the past, the present
plans of humans, or the future utopia that self-appointed messiahs desire. It is the unfolding of
God's story in real time, the tangible manifestation of an eternal and omnipresent creator who
not only set the universe in motion but is present in it. God was in the garden with Adam and
Eve. He was in the burning bush, speaking to Moses. He was in the pillar of cloud by day and
the pillar of fire by night, guiding the Israelites to the Promised Land. The child in the manger.
The suffering Savior on the cross. The linen-wrapped body in the tomb. The victorious risen
Christ. All God, every one of them, and even now God is present with us through the Holy Spirit.
The Christian story of history-beginning, middle, and end—is not of a God who must
be chased after or an ethereal presence who must be dreamed about but of a person who has
come, and is come, and will come, as real as anything is real, living in us and among us. It is
the story that explains all the other stories, a narrative of redemption in which God buys back
those who are made in his image. Thus we call the Christian view of history a redemptive
In his speech to the religiously inclined philoso-
phers of Athens, the apostle Paul spoke of God being
with us in such a way that our hearts would be tuned
to his presence:
[God] made from one man every nation of mankind
to live on all the face of the earth, having determined
allotted periods and the boundaries of their dwelling
place, that they should seek God, and perhaps feel
their way toward him and find him. Yet he is actually
not far from each one of us, for "In him we live and
move and have our being. As even some of your own
poets have said, "For we are indeed his offspring."
Redemptive Narrative: the
Christian metanarrative
that describes the course
of history unfolding
according to the biblical
chronicle of God's creative
act, humanity's rebellion,
Christ's redemptive
sacrifice, and God's
eventual restoration of
his creation.
(Acts 17:26-28)


<!-- page-10 -->

This is far different from the Muslim view of history, in which God is free to intervene
but is unknown to us and therefore unpredictable. In the Christian view, God makes himself
known— not exhaustively but sufficiently. We see as though through a dark glass, but we see.
His presence guides us, but his mystery raises our curiosity so we will seek to know him more
completely. History is moving in a direction!
Christians are not blisfully ignorant of the tragedy encompassing much of our lives
but place it in the context of God's fullest expression of himself: Jesus Christ. Galatians 4:4
says, "When the fullness of time had come, God sent forth his Son, born of woman, born
under the law." The language is that of a pregnancy and
a birth. God planted the seed of his plan, it grew, and
God planted the seed
of his plan, it grew, and
through suffering it
was born, promising
redemption from pain
and sorrow. Because of
this, Christians hold no
unreasonable expectations
of perfection in our
lifetime.
through suffering it was born, promising redemption
from pain and sorrow. Because of this, Christians hold
no unreasonable expectations of perfection in our life-
times. Rather, we anticipate persecution and trials while
expecting the triumph of righteousness, peace, and joy
in the end because of Jesus Christ.
Christians often speak of the unfolding of God's plan
as a sequence of creation, fall, and redemption: even
though God created the world very good, humans re-
belled against him; still, God has revealed in Jesus Christ
his ultimate plan for divine intervention, redemption,
and restoration. Christianity is more than a mere set of ideas; it is entirely embedded in the
real world of human history. Creation is sacred and stands under the blessing, judging, and
redeeming purposes of God.
The idea of purpose—of the redeeming purposes of God—implies God's constant super-
vision, a direction for the course of human events, and an ultimate end or goal. The basis for
the Christian worldview appeared in human history more than two thousand years ago in the
person of Jesus Christ. While "Christ died for our sins" is solid orthodox Christian theology,
"Christ died" is history. And "Christ dying so we may live" is both a guide to the present and a
promise for the future. Lets take a look at each in turn - the past, present, and future— in light
of Christ's sacrifice.
Making sense of the past in light of Christ's sacrifice. Christianity is rooted in history. It
makes specific claims about past events and ties its very claims to truth to the validity of those
claims. The Bible practically invites scrutiny with its specific claims - historical claims-about
what happened when and where. It is possibleto fnd evidence to prove or disprove them. In
fact, the Bible itself claims that either Christ is a historical figure and the Bible is a historical
document that describes God's communications with humanity and records real events in
the life of Christ, or the Christian faith is bankrupt and our so-called faith is described as
pathetic (1 Cor. 15:14)."l
Everyone places faith in something, hopefully some-
Everyone places faith in
something, hopefully
something true.
thing true. Is the Christian faith anchored in histori-
cal truth? If biblical scholarship is any indication, it is
well placed indeed. This is not to say that Christianity
is without its critics. Most of the negative criticism of the Bible, though, Norman L. Geisler
points out, "is pre-archaeological based on unproven philosophical presuppositions that have
subsequently been antiquated by archaeology? The Bible was authored accurately. It tells of
a Christ we know to have been an actual historical figure, and who—based on the weight of
evidence-actually did die on the cross and rise again from the dead.
Making sense of the present in light of Christ's sacrifice. Clearly belief in history as the
story of creation, fall, redemption, and restoration carries enormous implications for hu-
manity. Ifthe Christian philosophy of history is correct, the big picture of God's story invests
every moment of our lives with purpose. C. S. Lewis explained: "Where a God who is totally
purposive and totally foreseeing acts upon a Nature which is totally interlocked, there can be
no accidents or loose ends, nothing whatever of which we can safely use the word 'merely?
Nothing is 'merely a by-product of anything else. All results are intended from the first?"93
This belief about the direction of history is known as a linear conception of history. That
is, Christians believe that human history had a specific beginning (creation) and is being
directed by God toward a specific end (restoration). This framework implies that historic
events follow a cause-and-effect course toward that end.
The Christian idea that history is linear has influ-
enced all of Western civilization. Prior to Christianity's
influence, pagans held to a cyclical conception of history,
believing events in consecutive societies repeated over
and over. That history was directional created a unique
Linear Conception
of History: the belief
that history follows a
chronological pattern of
cause and effect.
conception of the movement of humanity through time.
John Warwick Montgomery says, The importance of
the Biblical conception cannot be overstressed. Here
for the first time Western man was presented with a
purposive, goal-directed interpretation of history. The
classical doctrine of recurrence had been able to give a
substantiality' to history, but it had not given it any aim
Cyclical Conception of
History: the belief that
history follows a repeating
pattern of recurring ages.
or direction "4
Direction implies a starting point and an ending point as well as a route. These, in turn,
require revelation. Just as viewing the earth from a satellite gives a larger perspective about
events on the ground, Christianity enables humanity to look at itself from above, from God's
perspective. This infuses it with meaning far beyond the passing of one day into the next or
the passing of one cultural system into the next.
Indeed, living as if every minute in our day is charged with meaning enables us to
see our place in the entire scope of history. Butterfield
explained: "There are some people who bring their sins
home to themselves and say that this is a chastisement
from God; or they say that God is testing them, trying
them in the fire, fitting them for some more important
work that he has for them to do. Those who adopt this
view in their individual lives will easily see that it en-
Indeed, living as if every
minute in our day is
charged with meaning
enables us to see our place
in the entire scope
of history.
larges and projects itself onto the scale of all history"95
- 244S -


<!-- page-11 (book p.445) -->

Because we can see the larger view of history and our place in it through God's revelation
in nature and in Scripture, we can understand the times and know what we ought to do. God
works through our actions to direct history toward his ultimate end: a day of judgment, the
restoration of the heavens and the earth (2 Pet. 3:13),* and the age to come, with Jesus Christ
as King of Kings and Lord of Lords. This is a present hope as well as a future hope. Wise men
still seek him, and for good reason; he is the only source of meaning in history and in life. In-
deed, if what the Bible says about Christ is true, it is the very hinge on which all else in history
swings. C.S. Lewis said, The central miracle asserted by the Christian is the incarnation. They
say that God became man.... If the thing happened, it was the greatest event in the history of
the earth, the very thing the whole story has been about?*
Making sense of the future in light of Christ's sacrifice. The Bible's promise of a future
kingdom ushered in by Jesus Christ is far more hopeful than any utopian scheme that sinful,
mortal humans have dreamed up. Genesis 3:15 describes an ongoing battle between good
and evil that involves every human being, a battle that would be resolved when the offspring
of the woman (often thought of as the coming Messiah) crushed the work of the Evil One.®
Correspondingly, Jesus is described as the "the Alpha and the Omega," the beginning and
the end of history (Rev. 1:8)."
D. W. Bebbington says that since Jesus won the battle against evil on the cross, "the
outcome of world history is therefore already assured. God will continue to direct the
course of events up to their end when the outcome will be made plain."10° At the end of all
things, the day of judgment (Acts 17:31; Rom. 2:12-16)101 will make Christ's victory over
sin apparent to all. Though no Christian through the
ages secured this victory, all will share in the triumph.
Christians are to engage
in exercising stewardship
over creation and, when it
comes to history, studying
the world God created
and telling the truth about
the past-even when it is
uncomfortable.
To put it in World War II terms, we live between D-day
(invasion) and V-day (victory). Redemption is on the
march. It is only a matter of time. And yet the Bible
doesn't tell Christians to sit back and let God do the
work. Christians are to engage in exercising stewardship
over creation and, when it comes to history, studying
the world God created and telling the truth about the
past-even when it is uncomfortable.
10. CONCLUSION
In God's plan, the difficulties we face in a fallen world have meaning. As the apostle Paul
said, "I consider that our present sufferings are not worth comparing with the glory that will
be revealed in us* (Rom. 8:18; 2 Cor. 4:11-18) 102 This is supremely good news. Everything
else becomes meaningful in its telling. This is the true meaning of history.
With this examination of the study of history, we are nearing the completion of our
text. We've looked at six dominant evangelistic worldviews and how they operate not only in
the study of history but in other disciplines all college students will find familiar, including
theology, philosophy, ethics, biology, psychology, sociology, law, politics, and economics. It's
been a long time since we embarked on this study, though, so let's invest one more chapter it
we've looked at so far.
reviewing key lessons and understanding the Christian worldview in the light of everything
ENDNOTES
1. Richard Brookhiser, James Madison (New York: Basic Books, 2011), 249.
2. Herbert Schlossberg, Idols for Destruction (Nashville: Thomas Nelson, 1983), 12.
3. Quoted in Schlossberg, Idols for Destruction, 12-13.
4. John H. Arnold, History: A Very Short Introduction (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2000), 18.
5. Arnold, History, 33. An early example of this was Saint Augustine, who used historical arguments to support his
theological arguments. See, for example, his book City of God against the Pagans.
6. K.A. Kitchen, On the Reliability of the Old Testament (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2003), 500.
7. Kenneth Burke, Attitudes toward History, 2nd ed. (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1959), 172.
8. Edward Hallet Carr, What Is History? (New York: Vintage Books, 1961), 5-10.
9. The doctrine of posse comitatus (Latin for "force of the county") has been a federal statute since 1878. It became law
in response to the presence of federal troops in the former Confederate states after the Civil War. The law specifies
that federal troops may not exercise the power to keep law and order outside of federal property except in very
limited circumstances. This law prevents the president from using the army to increase his power over the states.
10. Nancy Isenberg, Fallen Founder: The Life of Aaron Burr (New York: Viking, 2007), ix.
11. Schlossberg, Idols for Destruction, 13.
12. G. W. F. Hegel, introduction to Philosophy of History, trans. J. Sibree, rev. ed. (New York: Wiley, 1944).
13. Arnold, History, 12.
14. Carr, What Is History?, 111, emphasis added.
15. Quoted in John Lukacs, Historical Consciousness: The Remembered Past (New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction, 1994), 152.
16. Lukacs, Historical Consciousness, 152-53.
17. Quoted in Arnold, History, 36.
18. Carr, What Is History?, 34.
19. Karl R. Popper, The Poverty of Historicism (Boston: Beacon, 1957), 3.
20. Carr, What Is History?, 120.
21. Schlossberg, Idols for Destruction, 14-15.
22. Herbert Schlossberg spends several pages grappling with an argument made by David Donald, the late Harvard
professor and Pulitzer Prize-winning historian whose essay in the New York Times, "Our Irrelevant History," makes
a particular interpretation of history seem inevitable. See the discussion in Schlossberg, Idols for Destruction, 22-25.
23. Herbert Butterfield, The Whig Interpretation of History (London: G. Bell and Sons, 1963), 12.
24. John C. Greene, "The Concept of Order in Darwinism," in Paul G. Kuntz, ed., The Concept of Order (Seattle:
University of Washington Press, 1968), 99.
25. Emphasis is in the original. Bertrand Russell, The Impact of Science on Society (New York: Columbia University
Press, 1951), 45.
26. Julian Huxley, Essays of a Humanist (New York: Harper and Row, 1964), 76.
27. Paraphrase of Spencer's ideas, Greene, "The Concept of Order in Darwinism," in Kuntz, Concept of Order, 94.
28. In the essay Spencer was clear that he did not hold these conclusions as tentative. They were absolute, observable,
and incontrovertible. Here's an extended quotation: "The advance from the simple to the complex, through a
process of successive differentiations, is seen alike in the earliest changes of the Universe to which we can reason
our way back; and in the earliest changes which we can inductively establish; it is seen in the geologic and climatic
evolution of the Earth, and of every single organism on its surface; it is seen in the evolution of Humanity, whether
contemplated in the civilized individual, or in the aggregation of races; it is seen in the evolution of Society in
respect alike of its political, its religious, and its economical organization; and it is seen in the evolution of all those
endless concrete and abstract products of human activity which constitute the environment of our daily life. From
the remotest past which Science can fathom, up to the novelties of yesterday, that in which Progress essentialy
consists, is the transformation of the homogeneous into the heterogeneous. Herbert Spencer, "Progress: Its Law
and Cause," Westminster Review 67 (April 1857): 445-47, 451, 454-56, 464-65.
29. Paul Kurtz, ed., Humanist Manifesto II (Buffalo, NY: Prometheus Books, 1980), 13.
30. P. W. Atkins, The Second Lat (New York: W. H. Freeman, 1984), 189.
31. Bertrand Russell, The Basic Writings of Bertrand Russell, eds. Robert E. Egner and Lester E. Denonn (New York: Simon
and Schuster, 1961), 685.


<!-- page-12 -->

32. Albert Camus, "The Myth of Sisyphus, in Walter Kaufmann, ed. and trans., Existentialism from Dostoeusky to Sarte
(Cleveland: Meridian Books, 1956), 315.
33. Kurtz, Humanist Manifesto II, 16.
34. Corliss Lamont, The Philosophy of Humanism (New York: Frederick Ungar, 1982), 283.
35. Erich Fromm, You Shall Be as Gods (New York: Rinehart and Winston, 1966), 123.
36. Kurtz, Humanist Manifesto II, 14.
37. Isaiah Berlin, "Historical Inevitability," in Hans Meyerhoff, ed., The Philosophy of History in Our Time (Garden City,
NY: Doubleday Anchor, 1959), 252.
38. Lamont, Phílosophy of Humanism, 282.
39. Bertrand Russell, Religion and Science (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1961), 169.
40. Harry Elmer Barnes said the following about the accuracy of the Bible: "Biblical criticism, applied to the New
Testament, has removed the element of supernaturalism from the biographies of its founders as thoroughly as Old
Testament criticism has from those of its heroes." Harry Elmer Barnes, The New History and the Social Studies (New
York: Century, 1925), 21. For a thoughtful and powerful response, see vol. 1 of Norman Geisler, Systematic Theology, 4
vols. (Minneapolis: Bethany House, 2002), chaps. 25-26.
41. Victor J. Stenger, Not by Design (Buffalo, NY: Prometheus Books, 1988), 186.
42. Stenger, Not by Design, 188.
43. Richard Carrier, Sense and Goodness without God: A Defense of Metaphysical Naturalism (Bloomington, IN: Author-
House, 2005), 406.
44. C. S. Lewis, The Abolition of Man (New York: Macmillan, 1952), chap. 3.
45. Maurice Cornforth, Historical Materialism (New York: International Publishers, 1972), 68.
46. V. I. Lenin, Collected Works, 45 vols. (Moscow: Progress Publishers, 1980), 11:71.
47. Joseph Stalin, Dialectical and Historical Materialism (New York: International Publishers, 1977), 19.
48. Lenin, Collected Works, 2:57.
49. Karl Marx, Frederick Engels, and V. I. Lenin, On Historical Materialism (New York: International Publishers,
1974), 120. In another place Marx wrote, "Are men free to choose this or that form of society for themselves? By no
means.... Assume particular stages of development in production, commerce and consumption and you will have
a corresponding social structure, a corresponding organization of the family, of orders or of classes, in a word, a
corresponding civil society.... It is superfluous to add that men are not free to choose their productive forces-which
are the basis of all their history." Karl Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy (New York: International Publishers, 1936),
152-53.
50. Maurice Cornforth, The Open Philosophy and the Open Society (New York: International Publishers, 1976), 159.
51. Howard Zinn, A People's History of the United States: 1492-Present (New York: HarperCollins, 2005), 646.
52. Dan Flynn, "Master of Deceit," Front Page Magazine, June 3, 2003, http://archive.frontpagemag.com/readArticle
.aspx?ARTID-17914.
53. Kenneth Burke, Attitudes toward History, 2nd ed. (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1959), 322.
54. Marx, Engels, and Lenin, On Historical Materialism, 135.
55. Alasdair Macintyre, Whose Justice? Which Rationality? (Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press, 1989), 357.
56. Christopher Butler, Postmodernism: A Very Short Introduction (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2002), 32-36.
57. Umberto Eco, The Name of the Rose (Boston: Mariner, 1983), 527.
58. Hayden White, Metahistory (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1973), ix.
59. Hayden White, quoted in E. Culpepper Clark, "Argument and Historical Analysis," in J. Robert Cox and Charles
A. Willard, eds., Advances in Argumentation Theory and Research (Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press,
1982), 314.
60. Mark Poster, Foucault, Marismn and History: Mode of Production versus Mode of Information (Cambridge, MA: Polity
Press, 1984), quoted in Keith Windschuttle, The Killing of History: How Literary Critics and Social Theories Are Murdering
Our Past (San Francisco: Encounter Books, 1996), 132.
61. Michel Foucault, Power/Knowledge: Selected Interviews and Other Writings 1972-1977, ed. Colin Cordon (New York:
Pantheon Books, 1980), 193, quoted in Windschuttle, Killing of History, 151.
62. Foucault, Power/Knowledge, 62.
63. Jacques Derrida, Moscou aller-retour (Saint Etienne: De lAube, 1995), quoted in Stephen R. C. Hicks, Explaining
Postmodernism: Skepticism and Socialism from Rousseau to Foucault (Tempe, AZ: Scholargy, 2004), 186.
64, Gene Edward Veith, Postmodern Times: A Christian Guide to Contemporary Thought and Culture (Wheaton, IL: Crossway
Books, 1994), 161.
65. Quoted in Dennis McCallum, ed., The Death of Truth (Minneapolis: Bethany House, 1996), 133.
66. Quoted in McCallum, Death of Truth, 138-39.
67. See Mark Goldblatt's article, "Can Humanists W as 29ststructuralists? " in Academic Questions 18, no. 2 (Spring
2005). Goldblatt's answer: "This is why humanists, in the end, cannot talk to poststructuralists." Goldblatt levels a
Derrida the following charge: "For Derrida winds up his analysis with another logical throw-away: Neither/nor, that
s, simultaneously either/or.' In other words, whatever Derrida is affirming, he is also simultaneously denying. From
a humanist perspective, the only way to read Derrida on his own terms is mentally to insert the phrase or not' after
every one of his statements" (59).
68. Marilyn Ferguson, The Aquarian Conspiracy (Los Angeles: ]. P. Tarcher, 1980), 7l.
69. Quoted in Robert M. Oates, Permanent Peace (Fairfield, IA: Institute of Science, Technology, and Public Policy,
2002), 190.
70. Shakti Gawain, Living in the Light (San Rafael, GA: New World Library, 1986), 179.
71. David Spangler, Emergence: The Rebirth of the Sacred (New York: Dell, 1984), 12.
72. Marianne Williamson, A Return to Love: Reflections on the Principles of "A Course in Miracles" (New York: HarperCollins,
1989), 71.
73. Benjamin B. Ferencz and Ken Keyes Jr., Planethood (Coos Bay, OR: Vision Books, 1988), 141.
74. Ferencz and Keyes, Planethood, 33.
75. Paul Davies, "Great Balls of Fire," New Scientist 24, vol. 31 (December 1987): 64.
76. Joseph Campbell, The Power of Myth (New York: Doubleday, 1988), 18.
77. Campbell, Power of Myth, 30.
78. Eckhart Tolle, A New Earth (New York: Plume, 2005), 156.
79. M. Scott Peck, The Road Less Traveled (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1978), 269-70. Peck apparently converted
late in life to Christianity, but his statement in this particular book underscores the way New Spiritualists often
appropriate biblical language to reach distinctly unbiblical conclusions.
80. Quoted in Dean C. Halverson, Crystal Clear: Understanding and Reaching New Agers (Colorado Springs: NavPress,
1990), 77.
81. Donald H. Yott, Man and Metaphysics (New York: Weiser, 1980), 74.
82. Levi H. Dowling and Eva H. Dowling, The Aquarian Gospel of Jesus the Christ (Los Angeles: DeVorss, 1972), 24.
83. Quoted in Khurshid Ahmad, ed., Islam: Its Meaning and Message (Leicester: Islamic Foundation, 1999), 253.
84. Hammudah Abdalati, Islam in Focus (Indianapolis: American Trust, 1975), 51.
85. One sobering analysis of Islam's inherent militancy is Serge Trifkovic, The Sword of the Prophet: Islam, History,
Theology, and Impact on the World (Boston: Regina Orthodox Press, 2002). See also the Bat Ye'or, Islam and Dhimmitude:
Where Civilizations Collide, trans. Miriam Kochan and David Littman (Madison, NJ: Fairleigh Dickinson University
Press, 2002); and Cyril Glasse, The Concise Encyclopedia of Islam (New York: HarperCollins, 1991), 209, cited in Alvin J.
Schmidt, The Great Divide: The Failure of Islam and the Triumph of the West (Boston: Regina Orthodox Press, 2004), 222.
86. According to Mark Steyn, Islam is "the fastest-growing religion in Europe and North America: in the United
Kingdom, more Muslims than Christians attend religious services each week. Meanwhile, in areas of traditionally
moderate Islam, from the Balkans to Indonesia, Muslims are becoming radicalized and fiercer in their faith." One
of the radicalized groups serving Islam today, the infamous al-Qaeda founded by Osama bin Laden, has an English
counterpart called Tablighi Jamaat. According to Steyn, "Tablighi Jamaat is an openly Islamist organization of
global reach and, according to the FBI, an al Qaeda recruiting front for terrorists." The organization currently has
a mosque capable of hosting six thousand worshippers and is actively seeking to build what will be, according to
Steyn, "the biggest house of worship in the United Kingdom: it will hold 70,000 people-only 10,000 fewer than the
Olympic stadium, and 67,000 more than the largest Christian facility (Liverpool's Anglican cathedral)." Mark Steyn,
America Alone: The End of the World as We Know It (Washington, DC: Regnery, 2006), 95.
87. One of the many sources available for these purposes is Stuart Robinson, Mosque and Miracles: Revealing Islam and
God's Grace (Queensland, Australia: City Harvest, 2004).
38. Sociologist Rodney Stark writes, "Allah is not presented as a lawful creator but has been conceived of as an
extremely active God who intrudes on the world as he deems it appropriate. Consequently, there soon arose a major
theological bloc within Islam that condemned all efforts to formulate natural laws as blasphemy insofar as they denied
Allah's freedom to act." Rodney Stark, For the Glory of God (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2003), 154.
89. Quoted in Stark, For the Glory of God, 155. According to Stark, the focus on assimilating rather than generating
explains why the Muslims- and the Greeks before them -had "a theoretical collection of facts, and isolated crafts
and technologies," but "they never broke through to real science" (152).
90. Herbert Butterfield, Christianity and History (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1950), 66.
91 First Corinthians 15:14: 1 Christ has not been raised, then our preaching is in vain and your faith is in vain."
92. Geisler, Systematic Theology, 1:461.
93. C. S. Lewis, Miracles: A Preliminary Study (London: Geoffrey Bles, 1952), 149. Norman Geisler says of Lewiss work
on miracles, "The best overall apologetic for miracles written in this century." Norman Geisler, Miracles and Modern
Thought (Dallas: Probe Ministries International, 1982), 167. Geister's work is part of the Christian Free University
curriculum and is self-published.
94. John Warwick Montgomery, The Shape of 4latt hst (Minneapolis: Bethany Fellowship, 1975), 42.


<!-- page-13 (book p.448) -->

95. Quoted in C. T. Mcintire, ed., God, History, and Historians: An Anthology of Modern Christian Views of History (Oxford,
UK: Oxford University Press, 1977), 201. Creation, fall, redemption- the progression of events in God's creation: that
all was created good, but humanity rebelled against God and requires divine redemption. Thus, all of creation is
sacred and stands under the blessing, judging, and redeeming purposes of God.
96. Second Peter 3:13: "According to (God's) promise we are waiting for new heavens and a new earth in which
righteousness dwells."
97. Lewis, Miracles, 173-74.
98. Genesis 3:15: "I will put enmity between you and the woman, and between your offspring and her offspring; he
shall bruise your head, and you shall bruise his heel."
99. Revelation 1:8: "I am the Alpha and the Omega, says the Lord God, who is and who was and who is to come,
the Almighty!"
100. D. W. Bebbington, Patterns in History (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity, 1979), 169.
101. Acts 17:31: "[God] has fixed a day on which he will judge the world in righteousness by a man whom he has
appointed; and of this he has given assurance to all by raising him from the dead"; Romans 2:12-16: "All who have
sinned without the law will also perish without the law, and all who have sinned under the law will be judged by the
law. For it is not the hearers of the law who are righteous before God, but the doers of the law who will be justified.
For when Gentiles, who do not have the law, by nature do what the law requires, they are a law to themselves, even
though they do not have the law. They show that the work of the law is written on their hearts, while their conscience
also bears witness, and their conflicting thoughts accuse or even excuse them on that day when, according to my
gospel, God judges the secrets of men by Christ Jesus."
102. Romans 8:18: "I consider that the sufferings of this present time are not worth comparing with the glory that
is to be revealed to us"; 1 Corinthians 4:11-18: "We who live are always being given over to death for Jesus' sake, so
that the life of Jesus also may be manifested in our mortal flesh. So death is at work in us, but life in you. Since we
have the same spirit of faith according to what has been written, I believed, and so I spoke, we also believe, and so
we also speak, knowing that he who raised the Lord Jesus will raise us also with Jesus and bring us with you into his
presence. For it is all for your sake, so that as grace extends to more and more people it may increase thanksgiving,
to the glory of God. So we do not lose heart. Though our outer self is wasting away, our inner self is being renewed
day by day. For this light momentary affliction is preparing for us an eternal weight of glory beyond all comparison,
as we look not to the things that are seen but to the things that are unseen. For the things that are seen are transient,
but the things that are unseen are eternal."
