# Chapter 1

<!-- page-1 -->

1+
Introduction +
1. How Can I Find Direction in Life?
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to describe what a worldview is and give
examples of worldviews observed in the world today.
Suppose you find yourself lost and alone in the city of San Francisco, California. In order
to get unlost, what would you do? The first thing you would probably do is reach for your
phone. Suppose your phone battery is dead. What then? To find your way, you would
need to get a map or ask someone for directions. But what you need is not just any map
or set of directions. After all, if you're lost in San Francisco and someone gives you a map
of Detroit, you're not going to make much progress. What you need is a clear map of San
Francisco or directions from someone who knows the city well.
Life is similar. At some point most of us find ourselves
a little bit lost and in need of directions. We ask ourselves
questions like: "Who am I?" "Where did I come from?" "Why
am I here?" "Whom can I trust?" and "How should I live?" If
we know the answers to these questions, we will have a better
chance of navigating the world in a way that is purposeful and
meaningful. But finding directions for life is not easy. After
all, there are hundreds of voices that all claim to offer direction
and answers to life's biggest questions. These diverse voices
all represent worldviews. A worldview is a pattern of ideas and
beliefs that helps us make sense of the world and that guides our
decisions and actions.
Christianity, Islam, secularism, Marxism, new spirituality, and postmodernism are
just a few of the worldviews in the world today. Each of these claims to accurately explain
the world and help people find direction and purpose for life. But some worldviews fail
to accurately describe reality. They are like having a map of Detroit when you're lost in
San Francisco. Following a faulty worldview can get you even more lost and may result in
disastrous consequences. So, how can you know which worldview is right?
Finding the right path requires careful study. Summit Ministries Understanding
the Times Series is designed to aid you on this journey. This series is written from the
conviction that the Christian worldview best explains the world and helps us to live in it
with meaning and purpose. It is designed to help you find your way through life using
the lens of Christianity. Along the way, well also explore objections to Christianity and
consider the answers that other worldviews give to life's big questions. This series consists
of four books.
1. Foundations: This volume introduces the
foundational building blocks of the Christian
worldview. These include God (Father, Son,
and Holy Spirit), the Bible and its metanarrative
or grand storyline, what it means to love God
and neighbor, and how to practice your faith in
Christ.
2. Apologetics: This volume provides guidance
for defending and commending the Christian
faith to others. It also demonstrates how the
Christian worldview stands up to common
objections to it in society today.
3. Worldviews: This volume considers the
Christian worldview in comparison to five
other worldviews while examining the answers
• worldview: a pattern of ideas and
beliefs that helps us make sense
of the world and that guides our
decisions and actions
they each give to life's biggest questions in
areas like theology, philosophy, politics,
biology, and more.
CHAPTER 1 | 5


<!-- page-2 -->

DON'T...
DON'T..
DON'T..
DON'T...
4. Culture: This final volume shows how the Christian worldview has the resources to
engage with the most challenging and controversial issues of our day, and it provides a
model for faithful Christian engagement with the world.
2. What Does It Mean to Be a Christian!
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to explain what it means to be Christian, as well as
three common misconceptions about being a Christian.
The book in your hands, Foundations, seeks to help you understand what Christianity is
all about. In this first chapter, we'll introduce you to some of the foundational ideas on
which the Christian worldview is built. In the chapters that follow, we'll unpack those
ideas in greater detail. Let's begin with a question: "What does it mean to be a Christian?"
If you were to ask 100 different people this question, you might get 100 different answers.
However, not all answers are equal, and there are many misconceptions about Christianity.
One of the most common misconceptions is that Christianity is about following a
set of rules. Here's what this view sometimes sounds like: "Christians are not supposed
to swear, drink, use drugs, or have sex outside of marriage. By obeying these rules, they
earn God's favor and are rewarded with heaven, but everyone else is condemned to hell."
Christians who have this view are sometimes harshly critical of anyone who does not live
up to their moral standard, while non-Christians think being a Christian means being
judgmental and never having any fun.
Other people have the misconception that Christianity is an otherworldly religion that
doesn't have much to do with the here and now. We might state this view like this: "This
world is going to hell in a handbasket, but one day Christians will escape to heaven. In
the meantime, it's our job to make sure we get as many people saved as possible. Nothing
else really matters." Christians who have this misconception sometimes fail to show
much concern for the natural world or earthly problems like poverty and injustice, while
non-Christians think Christians are so obsessed with going to heaven that they neglect
everything else.
Another common misconception is the idea that you are automatically a Christian if
your parents were, that Christianity is something that you are born into, a part of your
family or cultural heritage. People with this idea may have respect for
Jesus and the Bible, but they may not be inclined to take either very
seriously. Meanwhile, devout followers of other religions sometimes
wonder why these "Christians" don't seem to care very much about
their faith.
Despite the popularity of these views, they do not help us
understand that Christianity is about what God has done, is doing,
and will do. It's about participating in the great story that God is
telling, that finds its climax in Jesus. In fact, the word Christian
refers to a person who follows Christ. The word is derived from Christ,
a title for Jesus which means Messiah. Jesus' followers were first called
Christians in Antioch during the first century. It is possible that the
title was invented by non-Christians and
used in a derogatory way to describe those
who followed Jesus. In any case, the
name has stuck. Christianity is centered
on the person of Jesus Christ and focuses
its understanding of the world through
the teachings of the Holy Bible.
To be a Christian is to be a Jesus-
follower (Luke 18:22); it is to believe
• Christian: a person who
follows Christ
that what he said about himself is true,
place one's trust in him, and commit
to following his ways. Christians believe Jesus is more than just a good moral teacher.
Christians believe Jesus is God, and that he came to save us from our sins by dying on the
cross and rising again so we can experience true life. He is the only One worthy of our
ultimate allegiance and has commissioned us to bring and participate in Jesus good news
of salvation, healing, and hope to the world. This is what Christianity is all about.
3. What Is the Bible, and What Is Its Place in a
Christian's Life?
› OBJECTIVE: You will be able to articulate why the Bible is foundational for
Christians.
The description of Christianity that we have offered above comes from a careful reading of
its foundational book—the Bible. For Christians, the Bible plays a central role in shaping
and informing our thoughts, values, decisions, and actions. It is foundational to our
worldview. If you've spent any amount of time among Christians, you've probably heard
things like, "The Bible says," "According to Scripture," or "We want to have a biblical
worldview." But why all the fuss? What's the big deal about the Bible anyway? Isn't it just
an old book?
Yes, the Bible is a really old book, written by people who were inspired by God and
to people who have long since been dead. However, Christians value the Bible and place
themselves under its authority because they believe that in it, God reveals himself to us.
He does this so that we can enter into a personal and eternal relationship with him and live
meaningfully and purposefully. While the Bible was not written directly to us, it has been
written for us. God speaks through it, even today, to communicate his will and help us live in
ways that are pleasing to him.
The Bible consists of sixty-six diverse books, which collectively tell the great story of
God, the world, and our place in the world. These books have been divided into chapters
and then portions, called verses, which are all numbered. Christians often reference a Bible
passage by stating a book's name followed by the chapter and verse, and you will see such
references throughout this book. (You'll learn more about what the Bible is in Chapter 2).
6 | CHAPTER 1
CHAPTER 1 | 7


<!-- page-3 -->

It may sound naive to live your life with reference to a book that is almost 2,000 years
old (and most of it is much older). Yet, it is only in modern times that people have come
to think of older things as less valuable or reliable. The Christian writer C. S. Lewis
identified this modern error as chronological snobbery. He argued that it's a mistake to
assume that we today are necessarily smarter or more enlightened than our ancestors.3
Chronological snobbery fails in at least two ways. First, while it's certainly true that
humans have made great strides in learning, this hasn't necessarily made us better people.
For example, we now have incredible technology, which can be harnessed to do wonderful
things. But this same technology can also be, and often is, used to harm people. Think of
all the weapons now available for killing people on a mass scale! Second, if you're looking
for directions in San Francisco, would you rather take them from someone who's been
around and knows the city well, or someone who just moved there? We can ask the same
question when it comes to finding directions in life. While age doesn't guarantee that
something is true, an idea that has stood the test of time and transformed the lives of
millions of people for good should not simply be shoved aside in favor of the latest, most
fashionable idea.
So, the Bible should not be dismissed simply because it is old. We must look deeper.
Both old ideas and new ideas must be carefully considered. Ultimately, all of us look to
someone or something to give us direction in life. The question is not if we will submit
to an authority, but to whom or to what we will submit. That's why, in Chapter 3, we'll
consider some evidence from history and archeology that supports the Bible's claim to be a
reliable guide for life.
4. How Are We Supposed to Read the Bible?
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to explain two common mistakes that people
make in reading the Bible.
The Bible is God's revelation to us, so we should treat it with reverence and learn well how
to use it. We should approach it with humility, listen to it, and be ready to learn from it,
rather than to impose our own ideas upon it. To say that the Bible is God's Word is not to
say that it simply dropped out of heaven as a rule book to be followed, ready-made with
answers to all of our questions. It is not as simple as following a GPS with
easy instructions-
—stop, turn right, reverse, etc. In fact, there are many
mistakes to avoid when reading the Bible, two of which are described
here. (We'll look at five more in Chapter 4.)
The first mistake to avoid is called proof texting. It is what happens
when Bible readers assume that finding God's will on a particular topic
is as simple as locating a verse in Scripture or when they string together
dozens of random verses to prove a particular point. The
main problem with this approach is that it totally ignores
the context and storyline of the Bible.' By proof texting, you
can make the Bible say pretty much anything you want. For
example, did you know that the Bible says there is no God?
Yes, these very words are in the Bible; but if you look at the context, you will discover that
far from denying the existence of God, the author is actually making the claim that God
does exist: "The fool says in his heart, "There is no God'" (Psalm 14:1).
Of course, we need to gather verses together to discover what the Bible actually says,
but we need to do this in a responsible way. The difference is between starting with a belief
and then trying to make the Bible fit that belief (proof
texting), or starting with an open mind and letting the
Bible shape our beliefs. In Chapter 4, we'll learn seven steps
that can help us become better Bible readers.
The second mistake is pursuing the Bible as the end goal
rather than the pursuit of God. In others words, do not
place the importance of the Bible above God, the Person
who wrote it. Ultimately, the Bible's authority is authority
that comes from God. When people forget this, the Bible
can become a rigid rule book or a weapon with which to
condemn others or to support our own agendas.
To read the Bible well, we need to understand its
content in context. This requires discernment. In the end,
however, reading the Bible isn't just about getting the
right interpretation, but about getting in on what God is
doing.? As we'll see in Chapter 5, the Bible is a grand story, in which we are invited to be
participants. By calling it a story, we're not saying that the Bible is a made-up fairy tale.
Rather, the Bible tells the true story of the world. It is a story that helps us make sense of
all our individual stories. In reading the Bible, we discover who God is, how much we are
loved, what his plan for the world is, and how we can be a part of what God is doing. It is
in this grand story that we begin to find answers to life's biggest questions.
5. Where Have We Been? Creation to Israel
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to briefly describe what happened in the first
three acts and the interlude of the biblical story.
Those who pick up a Bible for the first time encounter all sorts of odd things—a human
being made out of dirt, another taken out of him, a mysterious talking serpent, long
stories about a seemingly small and insignificant group of people, strange laws, miracles,
violence, and prophecies. If you think the Bible is a collection of nice moral tales, you're
in for a shock. To make sense of the Bible, it is helpful to think of its overall story like the
acts or movements in a play. In this book, we'll discuss the biblical story in six acts with an
intermission or interlude. Here is an overview of the first three acts and the interlude:
Act 1: Creation. The Bible begins with God. Out of nothing, God speaks all of creation
into existence. The Bible gives us two brief chapters to describe this, and many details we
would like to know are left out. But these two chapters want us to get at least one thing
absolutely clear: God's creation is good. They also describe the creation of human beings,
who are made in the image of God. Humans are to fill the earth with their descendants
CHAPTER 1 | 9
8 | CHAPTER 1
FOUNDATIONS 5
• Introduction


<!-- page-4 -->

Tapestry,
Bible scenes,
16th-century
Italy
10 | CHAPTER 1
and partner with God in bringing abundance out of creation. At the beginning of the
Bible's story, humans have life-giving and harmonious relationships with God, themselves,
other people, and nature. This is the subject of Chapter 6.
CACIATI D PARADO
Act 2: The Fall. This blissful situation sadly doesn't last. God gives the first humans one
rule: don't eat from the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil. But a mysterious serpent
appears and essentially tells the humans that God is holding out on them, that if they
disobey his command and eat the fruit, they will be gods themselves. Surrendering to
the temptation, they eat the fruit, and it isn't long before the world is plunged into chaos.
Violence spreads on the earth. Humans no longer trust God or one another; they become
internally broken and nature becomes a threat. All of this is the result of what the Bible
calls sin, and it will occupy our attention in Chapter 7.
Act 3: Redemption Initiated. The good news is that God isn't the sort to withdraw when
things go wrong. Instead, he stays involved and chooses a single family, through which
he intends to bless the whole world. This is the family of Abraham, whose descendants
became the nation of Israel. The majority of the Old Testament (the first part of the Bible)
is taken up with their story and so is Chapter 8 of this book. It is a story of struggle,
failure, and unfaithfulness to God, interspersed with blips of faithfulness and hope.
Through Israel's history, God reveals his true character and demonstrates his refusal to
give up on the world he created.
Interlude: The Second Temple Period. The Old Testament ends with Israel scattered
and awaiting God's redemption. During a period of almost 400 years after the last book
of the Old Testament, there is no direct revelation from God. But this time was anything
but silent. In Chapter 9, we'll survey this important period to discover what happened to
God's people during this trying time. For both Jews and Christians, these three acts and
the interlude describe our history. This is where we have been.
6. Where Are We Now? Jesus to New Creation
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to summarize the final three acts of the
biblical story.
Unless we understand the first parts of the biblical story-creation, fall, and redemption
initiated —we will have a very difficult time making any sense of the rest of the story,
which continues with the New Testament (the second section of the Bible? The New
Testament portrays Jesus as the climax of Israel's story. Because of Jesus, a whole new
world has come into being, not only for Israel, but for all people. This is what the next
three acts of the biblical story are all about.
Act 4: Redemption Accomplished. According to the Bible, Jesus is more than just a
good teacher or a spiritual sage. He is God in the fesh. In fact, being free from sin, Jesus
models for us everything that humans were meant to be. Jesus is also the long-awaited
Messiah, the one who fulfills all the hopes and expectations of Israel. Jesus came to Earth
to announce that the kingdom of God was arriving in his life and ministry. He claimed
to be the true Lord of this kingdom, and he demonstrated his authority by teaching and
Yet, Jesus was not the Messiah everyone expected. The Jews were hoping for a political
messiah who would overthrow their conquerors and defeat their enemies. Jesus, however,
came peacefully and preached a message of forgiveness and reconciliation. Eventually,
he was put to death by jealous religious leaders colluding with political authorities.
Surprisingly, the New Testament writers portray Jesus' death not as a defeat, but as his
victory over sin and death. Three days after his crucifixion, Jesus arose from the grave and
soon after ascended to God's throne to claim his rulership over the whole world. We'll learn
more about what all this means in Chapter 10.
Act 5: Restoration Initiated. The subject of Chapter 11 is the church. After the ascension
of Jesus, the Holy Spirit descended on Jesus' followers, empowering them to proclaim
the good news about Jesus throughout all the world. Soon they began gathering in small
communities to worship Jesus and follow his teaching. The church was born. The church
lives in an already, not yet time. In other words, the kingdom
of God has already arrived in Jesus, but it has not yet been
fully implemented. The church is tasked with proclaiming
the good news of God's kingdom and showing how it makes
a difference in every relationship. This good news is not just
about individual salvation, but about healing and hope for all
of creation.
Act 6: Restoration Accomplished. In Chapter 12, we'll see
how the story of the Bible ends. The story that began in a
garden ends in a magnificent city, where God is worshipped
and evil is banished forever. Before that end, the church must
learn what it means to be faithful to Jesus and suffer for his
name by resisting the forces of evil in the world. One day, Jesus will return to Earth,
bringing judgment. Then, all things will be made new and God's kingdom will be fully
implemented. We will be transformed so that we can live as the people we were created
to be.
These last three acts help us see where we are now, and what is coming in the future.
They show us how we can find meaning for our stories by participating in God's story.
Resurrection of
Christ, All Saints
Church, Zagreb,
Croatia
CHAPTER 1 | 11


<!-- page-5 -->

The Trinity,
detail, Church
of Santa Maria
dell,Anima,
Rome, Italy
12 CHAPTER 1
7. Who Is God? Who Am I?
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to discuss the importance of knowing God and
ourselves.
The Protestant reformer John Calvin once said that all true wisdom consists of knowledge
about God and knowledge about ourselves. Theologians and philosophers have studied
both of these things in great depth under the headings of theology (study of God) and
anthropology (study of humans). However, truths about God and
ourselves are not systematically laid out, but given directly and
indirectly throughout Scripture. We learn about God through the
way he reveals himself in the biblical story. We learn about ourselves
by listening to what God says about people and observing the
lives of various biblical characters. In Chapters 13-14, we'll take a
deeper, more focused dive into what the biblical story reveals about
who God is and who humans are.
Proverbs 9:10 says, "The fear of the Lord is the beginning of
wisdom, and the knowledge of the Holy One is insight." Many
people view God primarily as a police officer who keeps people in
line or as a court judge who passes sentences on criminals. Others
see God as a nice old man who is pretty much fine with whatever
we do. Still others believe that God is a bitter and angry tyrant,
an egotistical madman obsessed with his own power and glory. Because what we believe
about God will affect the way we live, it's important that we have true knowledge of God
as he is revealed in Scripture.
That said, the goal of theology is not to get God figured out. God is infinite, we are
finite, and so our knowledge of him will always be limited. However, in Chapter 13,
we'll see that God has revealed enough of himself so that we may know him and entrust
ourselves to him. We'll learn that God reveals himself as self-existent, spirit, personal,
eternal, all-knowing, all-powerful, present, unchanging, holy, wise, righteous, and loving.
We'll also take a look at what it means that God is a Trinity and why this doctrine is at
the heart of the Christian faith.
Knowledge of ourselves is the subject of Chapter 14. Self-discovery is an important part
of personal growth. Of course, self-discovery can be dangerous when it becomes a quest
for independence from God and others or a pathway to indulging sinful desires. However,
the kind of self-discovery were talking about here has to do with growing into the
individual people God created us to be-people who love God and others. This involves
learning more about our unique personalities, how God has designed us, and what he says
about us.
Sadly, for many Christians, their identity is defined by sin, and they view themselves
as worthless. While the Bible is clear that we are trapped and embroiled in sin from that
we cannot escape on our own, "sinner" is not our true identity. That is not who we were
created to be. God created us out of love and he longs for us to be all that he created us
to be. We are called to imitate Christ as image-bearers; it is when we are transformed to
be more like Christ that we become the best version of ourselves. When we live out of our
new identity as God's beloved children, we are living as the people God created us to be.
FOUNDATIONS 5
8. How Can I Become Like Jesus?
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to conclude that becoming like Christ is a lifelong
process.
The goal of the Christian life is to become like Christ. However, having a Christian
worldview will not necessarily make you more like Jesus. We might think that if we get
our beliefs straightened out, our behavior will necessarily follow the right course. Though
our beliefs do influence our behavior, they do not determine it. For example, if I really
believe that people are made in God's image, then I have motivation and a responsibility
to treat them with dignity and respect. However, just because I believe people are made in
the image of God doesn't mean that I will always treat them that way.
Our behavior may influence our beliefs just as much as our beliefs influence our
behavior. For example, consider the people who are addicted to pornography, which is
readily accessible in many formats. Yet, if people are made in God's image, as Christianity
teaches, then pornography is wrong. It treats people as objects to be used and abused for
one's own selfish pleasure instead of as human beings worthy of respect. Someone who
wants to keep looking at pornography may adopt a worldview to justify that behavior?
It is said that you will become like whatever you worship. To worship someone or
something is to show your devotion and adoration. If you worship money, you likely will
become cold, callused, and greedy. If you worship
power, you may become arrogant and domineering.
So then, becoming like Christ requires more than
simply having correct beliefs. It requires that we learn
to worship him with the whole of our lives. As one
Christian philosopher puts it, "We don't need less
than knowledge; we need more. We need to recognize
the power of habit. We need habits that help train
It is said.
chat vou will
become like
Whatever vou
worship.
us to be followers of Jesus. However, following Jesus
is not only about having good habits any more than
it is only about having right beliefs. Becoming like
Christ also means that our affections, desires, and
motivations will be aligned with Christ. This only
happens through the transforming power of the Holy Spirit.
Throughout the centuries, Christians have engaged in numerous habits and spiritual
practices—prayer, meditating on Scripture, solitude, giving, and more—all with the
intended goal of helping us to become more like Christ. These are often called spiritual
disciplines. This term can be somewhat misleading, as it suggests that these habits are dull
drudgery. However, spiritual disciplines are not about just doing religious stuff but about
practicing our faith and opening ourselves up to God's work in us. They are about what
Christ does in us to transform us to be like him.
Becoming like Christ is a lifelong process, but this is not a process that occurs in
isolation. We learn to be like Jesus in the company of others. We need other believers to
encourage us and help us practice the habits that open us to God's Spirit. We'll learn more
about all this in Chapters 15-16.
9 Introduction
CHAPTER 1 | 13


<!-- page-6 -->

9. What Does It Look Like to Be a Disciple
of Jesus?
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to express why love is a Christian's primary
calling.
What people think Christianity is all about often has something to do with their
experience of Christians. For some people, Christians are the biggest turnoff to
Christianity. Sadly, some people have only ever experienced Christianity from Christians
who are judgmental, mean-spirited, or unconcerned about the world. If you've experienced
this yourself, you know how damaging it can be. While this is a disappointing reality, we
cannot judge Christianity only on the basis of our experience (as
important as that is). There are two primary reasons for this.
First, as we will see in Chapter 7, Christianity teaches that all
human beings have fallen into sin. And trusting in Jesus doesn't
make sin disappear. Though sin no longer has power over the
Christian, every day Christians must say no to sin and yes to
the Holy Spirit. Every Christian is still on the journey of being
transformed into Christlikeness. So, in one sense, it is no surprise
that Christians can be just as sinful as anyone else. The second
reason that we cannot judge Christianity only on our experience of
Christians is this: we cannot blame Jesus when Christians live in a
way that is opposite to what he taught.
At the heart of Jesus' teaching is the idea that God is love. Jesus
showed us how much God loves us by giving of himself. He willingly surrendered his own
life on the cross so that we could be saved from sin and death and experience true life. This
life is above all to be characterized by love—that is, love is a Christian's primary calling.
That may sound trite to you. After all, people use the word love for many things. People
talk about loving pizza and loving their family; they say things such as "love is blind" or
"all you need is love." There is much confusion about what the word love actually means.
For many people today, loving someone is to be accepting of whatever they do as right and
good for them.
But this is not love. God's love accepts us as we are, but it does not leave us there. It
does not rest until we have been transformed. The love that Jesus showed is totally self-
giving, sacrificial, and for our good. Christian love is giving of ourselves for others. It
means honoring people as God's image-bearers and seeking their welfare before our own.
To be a Christian is to learn how to love in this way. It is to follow the example of Jesus,
who showed love in all his actions (more about this in Chapter 17).
If there is no love in a Christian community, something is clearly wrong. However,
there are no perfect Christian communities. Learning to love like Jesus takes time. It is
not natural for us to love in this way. We do not easily love our friends and neighbors,
let alone our enemies. Yet, over and over again throughout the centuries, the gospel has
transformed people, changing them from self-centered individuals to generous and loving
human beings. The love of Jesus, displayed through his followers both individually and in
community, has had a tremendously positive impact on the world. Having received God's
love for themselves, Christians are empowered by God's Spirit to demonstrate to the world
that God is love.
10. Conclusion
We believe the Christian worldview best explains the world we live in and helps us to live
in it with meaning and purpose. Like a good map, it helps us navigate the many decisions
we face and circumstances we encounter. This book is our attempt to help you learn how
to read that map. Of course, this book doesn't claim to have all the answers or address
every concern you may have. It is also written from a Protestant perspective, and it does
not engage in theological debates between the various branches of the Christian faith.
Perhaps you have been a Christian for a while and are looking to deepen your faith, or
maybe you are still unsure of how Christianity is relevant to your life. Perhaps you are a
new Christian who is seeking to understand what it means to be a follower of Jesus for the
first time. Or perhaps you do not call yourself a Christian at all but are still curious about
Christianity. Wherever you are in your journey, this book is for you.
We hope that in these pages, those who have been Christian for a long time will
discover fresh ways in which to understand Scripture and God's plan for them; that new
Christians will receive clear explanations of what the Christian story is all about; and that
those who are curious or skeptical will hear the good news of the gospel and be invited to
follow Jesus.
As you begin this book, we invite you to do four things:
1. Think about where you are in relationship to the Christian faith. Take some
time to write down your experience with Christianity, your doubts about it, and any
feelings or perceptions you have about Jesus, yourself, the world, the Bible, or anything
else related to Christianity. Knowing where you are
will help you better engage with the material in this
book.
2. Be open to learning new things and thinking
about things in a different way. Growth in any
area requires humility and hard work. You must first
recognize that you don't have it all figured out. And
neither do we! That's why it's important to carefully
evaluate what you are reading in this book and to
be open to discovering new ways of thinking about
Christianity.
3. Discuss what you are learning with your
classmates. Sometimes talking it out is the best way
to gain understanding. Share with your classmates what you are learning, as well as your
questions, and see what they have to say. Be curious about the thoughts of others and
gracious when you disagree.
Learning
to love like
Jesus takes
time.
CHAPTER 1 | 15
14 | CHAPTER 1
FOUNDATIONS G


<!-- page-7 (book p.17) -->

4. Pray about what you are learning. Ultimately, the Holy Spirit is the one who
illuminates us and convinces us of the truth. That's why we must continually pray for his
guidance. Even if you are not a Christian, you can pray a prayer that invites God to help
you—something like, "God, if you are really there, please reveal yourself to me and help
me to learn about you."
By the end of this book, we hope that you will have a solid understanding of the
basics of the Christian worldview. Ultimately, the Christian worldview is not merely about
understanding, but about getting involved in what God is doing. As you read, think about
how God is inviting you to respond and participate in his kingdom. Let's dive in!
ENDNOTES
1"And in Antioch the disciples were first called Christians" (Acts 11:26).
2 Justin Taylor, "Why Were the Disciples First Called 'Christians' at Antioch? (Acts 11, 26)," Revue Biblique
101, no. 1 (1994): 78.
3C. S. Lewis, Surprised by Joy: The Shape of My Early Life (Orlando, FL: Harcourt Brace & Company, 1955),
207. Lewis defines chronological snobbery as "the uncritical acceptance of the intellectual climate common
to our own age and the assumption that whatever has gone out of date is on that account discredited."
4 "Proof Texting," Theopedia.com, https://www.theopedia.com/proof-texting
5 Eugene H. Peterson, Eat This Book: A Conversation in the Art of Spiritual Reading (Grand Rapids, MI:
Eerdmans, 2006).
"The outline of the biblical metanarrative used in this book is adapted from Craig G. Bartholomew and
Michael Goheen, The Drama of Scripture: Finding Our Place in the Biblical Story, 2nd ed. (Grand Rapids:
MI, Baker, 2014). The Drama of Scripture is an excellent text for understanding the biblical metanarrative in
greater depth. We highly recommend it for those looking for a deeper dive on what is presented in Chapters
6-12 of this book.
7 Scot McKnight, The King Jesus Gospel: The Original Good News Revisited (Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan,
2011), 34-44.
8 John Calvin, Institutes of the Christian Religion, trans. by Henry Beveridge (Peabody, MA: Hendrickson
Publishers, 2008), Book 1.1, 4.
'The Bible invites us to bring all our sins and burdens to Jesus (1 John 1:9, Matthew 11:28-29). He can heal
and transform our desires (1 John 1:7, Titus 2:14, 2 Corinthians 5:17).
1° James K. A. Smith, You Are What You Love: The Spiritual Power of Habit (Grand Rapids, MI: Brazos Press,
2016), 6.
What the Bible
Is and Isn't
1. The Importance of the Bible in History
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to articulate four ways the Bible has influenced
the world.
The Bible is the best-selling book of all time. It is printed, in part or in whole, in more
than 3,400 languages! There has never been another book like it. In this chapter we'll
explore what the Bible is and is not. We will look at concepts such as revelation and truth
that can help us grasp the place of the Bible in our lives. Hopefully, we will gain a better
understanding of why and how this one book has changed the world.
16 | CHAPTER 1
