# Chapter 3

<!-- page-1 (book p.31) -->

ENDNOTES
'As of 2021, the full Bible is available in 704 different languages. The New Testament is available in another
1,582 languages. Selections and stories are available in a further 1,196 other languages, "Our Impact,"
Wycliffe Bible Translators, https://www.wycliffe.org.uk/about/our-impact/.
'Dan P. Buttafuoco, "Five Reasons Why the Bible Is the Most Important Book on Earth," The Pocket
Testament League, 2013, https://members.ptl.org/alive/whyscripture.php.
3"Why Is the Bible Important?" Biblica: The International Bible Society, https://www.biblica.com/resources/
bible-faqs/why-is-the-bible-important/.
'David A. Noebel, "5 Reasons to Study the Bible," Summit Ministries, February 24, 2016, https://www.
summit.org/resources/articles/5-reasons-to-study-the-bible/.
'Richard Dawkins, "Why I Want All Our Children to Read the King James Bible," The Guardian, May 19,
2012, https://www.guardian.co.uk/science/2012/may/19/richard-dawkins-king-james-bible.
'John Adams and John Quincy Adams cited in "What Leading Americans Have Said about the Bible,"
Houston Baptist University, https://hbu.edu/museums/dunham-bible-museum/influence-in-history-and-
culture/what-leading-americans-have-said-about-the-biblel.
'Alvin J. Schmidt, How Christianity Changed the World (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 2004).
•William Lyon Phelps, Human Nature in the Bible (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1922), ix.
'Joseph C. Sommer, "Some Reasons Why Humanists Reject the Bible," American Humanist Association,
https://americanhumanist.org/what-is-humanism/reasons-humanists-reject-bible/.
1°Lydia Saad, "Record Few Americans Believe Bible Is Literal Word of God," Gallup, May 15, 2017, https://
news.gallup.com/poll/210704/record-few-americans-believe-bible-literal-word-god.aspx.
"Robert Saucy, Scripture: Its Power, Authority, and Relevance (Nashville: Word Publishing, 2001), 78. See
also Carl F. H. Henry's, "The Lost Unity of the Bible," in God, Revelation, and Authority, vol. 4, God Who
Speaks and Shows: Fifteen Theses, Part Three, 2nd ed. (Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 1999).
"Sheri Bell, "Why the Lost Gospels Don't Belong in the Bible," Josh McDowell, A Cru Ministry, February
28, 2018, https://www.josh.org/lost-gospels-dont-belong-bible/.
13 Rick Warren, "The Bible: God's Owner's Manual for Life," PastorRick.com, April 24, 2020, https://
pastorrick.com/the-bible-gods-owners-manual-for-lifel.
'Millard J. Erickson, Christian Theology, 2nd ed. (Grand Rapids: Baker Academic, 2001), 201.
'Erik Thoennes, Life's Biggest Questions: What the Bible Says about the Things that Matter Most
(Wheaton, IL: Crossway), 41-42.
I William Smith, "The Canon of Scripture," Smith's Bible Dictionary, Bible Study Tools, https://www.
biblestudytools.com/dictionary/canon-of-scripture-the/.
"Andreas ]. Köstenberger and Michael J. Kruger, The Heresy of Orthodoxy: How Contemporary Culture's
Fascination with Diversity Has Reshaped Our Understanding of Early Christianity (Wheaton, IL: Crossway,
2010), 149-50.
18 This is summarized from Jonathan Morrow's article, "How Do We Know the Bible Includes the Right
Books?", in Apologetics Study Bible for Students, ed. Sean McDowell (Nashville: Holman Bible Publishers,
2010), 1230.
"Gordon R. Lewis, "What Does It Mean that God Inspired the Bible?", in The Apologetics Study Bible, ed. J.
P. Moreland, Paul Copan, and Ted Cabal (Nashville: Holman Bible Publishers, 2017), 1516.
20William Lane Craig, Reasonable Faith: Christian Truth and Apologetics, 3rd ed. (Wheaton, IL: Crossway
Books, 2008), 207.
"See John R. W. Stott, The Authority of the Bible (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 1974).
22 Don Stewart, "What Is the Doctrine of Biblical Inerrancy?" Blue Letter Bible, https://www.blueletterbible.
org/Comm/stewart_don/faq/bible-difficulties/question1-what-is-the-doctrine-of-biblical-inerrancy.cfm.
23 Aristotle, Metaphysics, ed. Roger Bishop Jones, trans. W. D. Ross, 58-59. Available online at http://texts.
rbjones.com/rbjpub/philos/classics/aristotl/mbook_draft.pdf.
24Douglas Groothuis, Christian Apologetics: A Comprehensive Case for Biblical Faith (Downers Grove, IL:
IVP Academics, 2011), 126.
25John Piper, "The Challenge of Relativism, Desiring God, March 16, 2007, https://www.desiringgod.org/
messages/the-challenge-of-relativism.
26Kelly Monroe Kullberg, quoted in Jonathan Morrow, Think Christianly: Looking at the Intersection of
Faith and Culture (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 2011), 50.
2 Darrell L. Bock, Can I Trust the Bible?: Defending the Bible's Reliability (Norcross, GA: RZIM, 2001), 52.
Does the Bible
Have Authority?
1. Who's in Charge?
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to articulate what authority is and what it means
to submit to God's authority.
The poem on the following page, Invictus, is Latin for unconquered. This is one of the
most quoted poems ever written. Oddly enough, it was the favorite poem of statesman
Nelson Mandela and also mass murderer Timothy McVeigh. While it is a statement of
human endurance, it is also an arrogant assertion that we are our own authority. We
answer to no one.
30 | CHAPTER 2


<!-- page-2 -->

Invictus
Out of the night that covers me,
Black as the pit from pole to pole,
I thank whatever gods may be
For my unconquerable soul.
In the fell clutch of circumstance
I have not winced nor cried aloud.
Under the bludgeonings of chance
My head is bloody, but unbowed.
Beyond this place of wrath and tears
Looms but the horror of the shade,
And yet the menace of the years
Finds and shall find me unafraid.
It matters not how strait the gate,
How charged with punishments the scroll,
I am the master of my fate,
I am the captain of my soul.
- William Ernest Henley!
The word authority comes from a Latin word meaning influence or command. It answers
the question,
"Who's in charge?"
Have you ever seen the statement "Question Authority" on a bumper sticker? There
is, of course, a valid democratic sentiment to it. Don't believe everything you hear,
especially from the government. Today, however, "Question Authority" usually expresses
radical individualism. "No one has the right to tell me what to do," people say. Few enjoy
being told what to do or how to think. Yet the rejection of
authority tosses out the baby with the bathwater. It removes
both illegitimate and legitimate forms of authority. When all
authority is banished, civil society becomes impossible. But
as the iconic musician Bob Dylan sang,
"You're gonna have
to serve somebody." How can we know when to submit to
authority and when to oppose it?
For Christians, the lines of authority are clear. To
confess "Jesus is Lord" is to proclaim one's submission to his
authority. The New Testament word for obey comes from two
Greek words meaning hear and under (that is, to place oneself
under authority). Embracing Jesus' worldview-believing
what he taught and obeying his teaching— is an invitation to "a long obedience in the same
direction," a journey toward conformity to Christ? Romans 8:29 says, "For those whom he
foreknew he also predestined to be conformed to the image of his Son."
But what does it look like to place ourselves under God's authority? How do we know
what he wants? Christians maintain that what God wants is not unknowably mysterious.
We believe that God makes himself known and conveys his aurhority most clearly through
Scripture. In this chapter we'll explore the evidence for the Bible's authority and accurate
preservation, as well as answer common objections that people have about the Bible's
authority. In the end, we'll see that the Bible is a trustworthy book that has implications for
all of life.
Let's begin with what the Bible says about itself.
2. Internal Evidence for the Bible's Authority:
Old Testament
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to use internal evidence from the Bible to defend
the Old Testament's authority.
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to give specific examples of how Jesus confirmed
his trust in the Old Testament.
Internal evidence is evidence from Scripture
that supports the claims of the Bible. The Bible
claims authority for itself. Throughout the
Old Testament, phrases like "Thus says the
LORD" and "The Word of the Lord came
to me" occur more than 3,000 times. The
writers claimed that they were sharing God's
authoritative revelation. God not only spoke
to the prophets, he also spoke through the
prophets as Hebrews 1:1-2 affirms: "Long ago,
at many times and in many ways, God spoke
to our fathers by the prophets."
The writers also claimed that God's revelation
is perfect, right, and flawless:
The law of the Lord is perfect, reviving the soul; the testimony of the LoRD is sure,
making wise the simple; the precepts of the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart; the
commandment of the Lord is pure, enlightening the eyes. -Psalm 19:7-8
Every word of God proves true; he is a shield to those who take refuge in him. Do not
add to his words, lest he rebuke you and you be found a liar. - Proverbs 30:5-6
The Old Testament writers clearly thought they were communicating God's authoritative
revelation, but what did Jesus think? How did he view the Old Testament? According to
Christian apologist Josh McDowell, Jesus viewed it "as the authoritative word of God."
CHAPTER 3 | 33
32 | CHAPTER 3


<!-- page-3 -->

Moses and the
Stone Tablets
34 | CHAPTER 3
As God in human Alesh, Jesus speaks with final authority. And his testimony regarding
the Old Testament is loud and clear. Jesus believed that the Old Testament was
divinely inspired, the veritable Word of God. He said, "The Scripture cannot be broken'
(John 10:35). He referred to Scripture as 'the commandment of God' (Matthew 15:3)
and as the 'Word of God' (Mark 7:13). He also indicated that it was indestructible:
*Until Heaven and earth pass away, not the smallest letter or stroke shall pass away
from the law, until all is accomplished' (Matthew 5:18).4
In his teaching, Jesus treated stories in the Old Testament as true and authoritative.
Examples include the story of Cain and Abel (Genesis 4:1-16, Luke 11:51), the destruction
of Sodom and Gomorrah and Lot's wife (Genesis 19:23-26; Luke 17:29, 32), Moses at the
burning bush (Exodus 3, Mark 12:26), the provision of manna for Israel (Exodus 16, John
6:31-51), and Jonah and Nineveh (Jonah, Matthew 12:38-41).
After his resurrection, Jesus told his disciples
that the Old Testament pointed to him: "These are
my words that I spoke to you while I was still with
you, that everything written about me in the Law
of Moses and the Prophets and the Psalms must be
fulfilled" (Luke 24:44).
One pastor summarizes Jesus' trust in the Old
Testament this way:
• Jesus consistently refers to the Old Testament
as the present and eternal truth of God.
• Jesus always assumes Scripture is final in
authority and that all parts are of equal
authority.
• Jesus always assumes Old Testament prophecies must be fulfilled as given.
• Jesus always treats the miraculous events of the Old Testament as if they occurred
exactly as written.
• Jesus leans on the Old Testament in his spiritual anguish (Matthew 4:1-10, 27:46).
• Jesus never hesitates to confront error, but he says absolutely nothing about problems
in the Scriptures. Apparently, Jesus found nothing to confront in the Old Testament.
• Jesus builds on the foundation of the Old Testament by clarifying the profound
extent to which its teachings must be applied (Matthew 5:27-28).S
3. Internal Evidence for the Bible's Authority:
New Testament
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to describe the apostles' intent and authority for
writing the New Testament.
What about the New Testament? Is it also authoritative? Yes! Jesus gave authority to the
apostles to bear witness about him (Matthew 28:16-20). He promised that the Holy
Spirit would help them to do this John 14:26). The Holy Spirit, who spoke through the
prophets in the Old Testament, inspired the apostles to share the gospel of Jesus Christ in
the New Testament.
The apostle John spoke with the authority Jesus gave him by reiterating old commands
and offering new commands:
Beloved, I am writing you no new commandment, but an old commandment that
you had from the beginning. The old commandment is the word that you have
heard. At the same time, it is a new commandment that I am writing to you, which
is true in him and in you, because the darkness is passing away and the true light is
already shining. -1 John 2:7-8
The apostle Peter referred to the writings of Paul, who was not present during the
earthly ministry of Jesus, as also having the authority of Scripture:
And count the patience of our Lord as salvation, just as our beloved brother Paul also
wrote to you according to the wisdom given him, as he does in all his letters when
he speaks in them of these matters. There are somethings in them that are hard to
understand, which the ignorant and unstable twist to their own destruction, as they
do the other Scriptures. -2 Peter 3:15-16
Paul himself also shared the view that his teaching had authority as God's Word:
If anyone thinks that he is a prophet, or spiritual, he should acknowledge that the
things I am writing to you are a command of the Lord. If anyone does not recognize
this, he is not recognized. -1 Corinthians 14:37-38
And we also thank God constantly for this, that when you received the word of God,
which you heard from us, you accepted it not as the word of men but as what it really
is, the word of God, which is at work in you believers. -1 Thessalonians 2:13
It is important to understand that the
internal evidence in Scripture does not, by
itself, prove that the Bible is true. After all,
anyone could pick up a pen and claim to be
writing a message from God. What the internal
evidence shows is that the writers of the Bible
did not intend to simply offer advice or tell
some good stories. Instead, they claimed that
they were communicating God's authoritative
revelation. If they had not believed this, there
would very little reason for Christians today
to believe that the Bible is God's authoritative
Word. Also, the fact that all the biblical authors
(writing in different times and places) manage to teach a consistent message makes their
claims to be speaking God's Word much more believable. Let's now turn to the external
evidence for Scripture that supports its authority, accuracy, and reliability.
CHAPTER 3 | 35


<!-- page-4 -->

Ancient
bas-relief from
Persepolis,
previously
ruled by Darius
and Xerxes, in
Shiraz, Iran
| CHAPTER 3
4. External Evidence for the Reliability of the Old
Testament
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to identify specific examples of external evidence
that support the Old Testament's reliability.
Remember, internal evidence is evidence from Scripture that supports the claims of
the Bible. In contrast, external evidence is evidence from outside the Bible that confirms
the historical reliability of Scripture. Christians' trust in the authority of Scripture is not
blind. It is based on sound reasoning supported by historical confirmation, archaeological
evidence, and fulfilled prophecy. Let's first consider evidence for the reliability of the Old
Testament.
Historical events recorded in the Old Testament can be confirmed in ancient
nonbiblical sources. Such events include:
• The campaign into Israel by Pharaoh Shishak
(1 Kings 14:25-26, 2 Chronicles 12:1-9)
• The revolt of Moab against Israel (2 Kings 1:1, 3:5)
• The defeat of Ashdod by Sargon II (Isaiah 20:1)
• The campaign of Sennacherib against Judah (2 Kings 18:13)
• The siege of Lachish by Sennacherib (2 Chronicles 32:9)
• The assassination of Sennacherib by his own sons (2 Kings 19:36-37)
• The fall of Nineveh and other Assyrian cities as predicted by the prophets (Nahum
1:1-3:19, Isaiah 10:5-19)
• The fall of Jerusalem to Nebuchadnezzar (2 Kings 24:1-2;
Jeremiah 21:7, 22:5)
• The captivity of Jehoiachin, king of Judah, in Babylon (2 Kings 24:15,
Esther 2:66
Archacological discoveries also verify the accuracy of the Old Testament? One scholar
identified over 50 figures from the Bible who have been confirmed archaeologically. These
include Israelite kings, Mesopotamian monarchs, and lesser-known figures.® Here are a
few other important discoveries:
• Eleventh century BC: Most of the cities mentioned from Genesis through the book of
Joshua have been discovered.
• Tenth century BC: Some of the building projects of Solomon have been unearthed at
Megiddo and Gezer?
• Ninth century BC: The monolith inscription of Shalmaneser III mentions "Ahab the
Israelite" as having the most powerful military elements in the Israelite and Syrian
coalition.'°
• Eighth century BC: The Khorsabad Annals give the account of Sargon IT's captivity
of Samaria in 722 Bc."
• Seventh century BC: The tunnel Hezekiah built to bring water into Jerusalem has
been found (2 Kings 20:20; 2 Chronicles 32:30)2
Then, there is the matter of fulfilled prophecies. Many predictions recorded in the Old
Testament actually came to pass, including:
• Babylon ruling over Judah for 70 years (predicted in Jeremiah 25:11-12, fulfilled in
2 Chronicles 36:20-21)
• The Jews surviving Babylonian rule and returning to
the Promised Land (predicted in Jeremiah 32:36-37,
fulfilled in Ezra 1:5, Nehemiah 2:16-17)
• Babylon's kingdom being overthrown and reduced to
swampland (predicted in Isaiah 13:19, 14:23; fulfilled
gradually through the work of Darius, Cyrus, Xerxes,
and other conquerors) 4
• Tyre being attacked by many nations and its stones,
timber, and soil being cast into the sea (predicted in
Ezekiel 26:3-12; fulfilled in attacks by Babylon and by
Alexander the Great) 'S
• Edom being toppled and humbled, (predicted in
Jeremiah 49:17; fulfilled after the city was conquered by
the Nabateans)16
The Old Testament predicts the coming Messiah in
more than 300+ prophecies. Many are so specific that
the probability of fulfilling even a handful is stageringly
improbable; the odds of fulfilling just eight were once
estimated to be one in 107 (one in 100,000 trillion). The
Jesus Film Project published a list of 55 prophecies that
Jesus fulfilled relating to his birth, ministry, death, resurrection, and role in the church.!?
Prophecies related to Jesus' second coming are yet to be fulfilled.
The Black
Obelisk,
originally found
in Nineveh: King
Jehu of Israel
bows before King
Shalmaneser
Ill of Assyria
CHAPTER 3 | 37


<!-- page-5 -->

5. External Evidence for the Reliability of the
New Testament
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to list ancient nonbiblical writings that confirm
the historicity of Jesus and the teaching of the early Christians.
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to describe the role of eyewitness testimony and
the church fathers in affirming the accuracy of the Gospels.
The reliability of the New Testament is also supported by external evidence. Historical
writings outside of the New Testament affirm basic facts about Jesus and his disciples, as
historian Edwin Yamauchi observes:
Even if we did not have the New Testament or Christian writings, we would be able
to conclude from such non-Christian writings as Josephus, the Talmud, Tacitus, and
Pliny the Younger [that] Jesus was a Jewish teacher; many people believed he performed
healings and exorcisms; he was rejected by the Jewish leaders; he was crucified under
Pontius Pilate in the reign of Tiberius; [and that] despite this shameful death, his
followers, who believed that he was still alive, spread beyond Palestine so that there
were multitudes of them in Rome by AD 64.18
The book of Acts gives a number of historical details for which we can find
archaeological evidence. Scholars have affirmed several details of Luke's accounts,
providing evidence that Paul's journeys took place
the way the author says they did. These findings,
along with many others, validate the accuracy of the
only history book of the early church accepted in the
biblical canon.!?
There is much more evidence affirming the basic
historical truthfulness of the Bible. Consider the
church fathers:
theologians and writers
who established the
foundations of Christianity
Gospels. Liberal scholar John P. Meier, from the
University of Notre Dame, rigorously studied the
miracles in the Gospels. Even he found that almost
half of them included enough detail to conclude that
the historical scene they described could have occurred
as reported. 20
First, we can trust that the Gospels are authoritative and accurate accounts of the life
and ministry of Jesus because they were written based on eyewitness testimony. "This is
the disciple who is testifying to these things and wrote these things, and we know that his
testimony is true" (John 21:24). Elsewhere John insists that he was proclaiming what he and
others "have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon and have
touched with our hands, concerning the word of life" (1 John 1:1).
This means the Gospels were written early enough to be affirmed or denied by other
eyewitnesses and by those who heard the Gospel message from eyewitnesses. This next
generation included church fathers like Ignatius, Polycarp, and Clement. Church fathers
| CHAPTER 3
were theologians and writers who established the foundations of Christianity. The aposle Paul
had described himself as a father of those who believed the good news he preached about
Jesus (1 Corinthians 4: 15), and this tile was later applied more broadly to the leaders of
the church in the first centuries after it began.
The teachings of the church fathers closely mirror what we read in the New Testament.
A former detective who researched the Gospels
describes the value of the church fathers for
reinforcing the apostolic writings:
Early Church Fathers sat at the feet of
the apostles and learned from the apostolic
eyewitness accounts. These secondary leaders
then wrote letters and documents of their
own, repeating the claims of their teachers....
The Early Church Fathers did confirm enough
of the New Testament claims to validate and
authenticate the writings of the apostles."
& the Dead Sea Scrolls: the
oldest surviving collection
of Jewish canonical texts
written 300-400 years before
the birth of Christ
This external evidence points to the
reliability and truthfulness of Scripture.
6. Accurate Preservation of the Bible
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to explain how the Dead Sea Scrolls and many
early New Testament manuscripts confirm the accurate preservation of the
biblical writings.
We have seen that there is both internal and external evidence for the Bible's authority; but
how do we know that the Bible has been accurately preserved over time? How do we know
that the words in the Bible today are the words that the original authors wrote down?
From the beginning, those charged with transmitting God's Word sensed the need
to conduct their work with great care. This can be seen with the discovery of the Dead
Sea Scrolls in a cave at Qumran, in Israel. The Dead Sea Scrolls are the oldest surviving
collection of Jewish canonical texts written 300-400 years before the birth of Christ. One
stunning scroll contained almost the complete text of the book of Isaiah. This scroll
was nearly one thousand years older than the next oldest copy of Isaiah known at that
time. The book of Isaiah was probably copied hundreds of times, yet the copy of Isaiah
found among the Dead Sea Scrolls is virtually the same as newer copies. Between the
manuscripts there was a variation of less than 5 percent, most of which consisted of
spelling variations.?2
The people of Israel understood their holy books were God's Word and took great care
to accurately preserve them.2 Former detective J. Warner Wallace details how later scribes
known as the Masoretes (in the Middle Ages) developed strict measures to guarantee every
new copy of Scripture was an exact reproduction of the original. For example:
• Nothing could be written from memory; each line was to be copied letter for letter
from a reliable predecessor.
CHAPTER 3 | 39


<!-- page-6 -->

Church fathers
mural, St.
George Church,
Kurbinovo,
Macedonia
• Scribes and copyists also kept detailed statistics to guard against error. As an example,
Leviticus 8:8 (in the Hebrew structure of the Bible) was identified as the middle verse
of the Torah. A single word in Leviticus 10:16 was identified as the middle word of
the Torah and a single letter in Leviticus 10:42 was identified as the middle letter of
the Torah.
• Scribes and copyists listed important statistics at the end of each book. As an
example, the total number of verses in Deuteronomy is 955, the total in the entire
Torah is 5,845; the total number of words is 97,856, and the total number of letters
is 400,945. By assembling statistics such as these, each book could be measured
mathematically to see if there were any copyist errors.24
The New Testament documents were also carefully preserved from the outset. As
apologist Teri Dugan notes:
• The writings of the New Testament were immediately copied and widely dispersed
throughout the Roman Empire and beyond (see the book of Acts), thus eliminating
time for changes, forgeries, or embellishments.
• We have over 25,000 early New Testament manuscripts and fragments from five
different document families from ancient Christian communities, dating as early as the
second century AD.
• Scholars find a 99.5 percent agreement between these early manuscripts with
variations stemming mainly from differences in spelling, grammar, word order, and
minor deletions or additions (noted in modern Bible footnotes) —none of which
[affect] any doctrine of the Christian faith.2
Though we do not have the original manuscripts of the New Testament, there is still
enough evidence to reconstruct the original text. Josh McDowell explains:
As scholars do not have the original documents of the Scriptures, they have had to
determine if the existing (extant) copies of the originals are reliable. The greater the
number of copies, and the earlier their dating, the easier it is to reconstruct a text closer
to the original and identify errors or discrepancies
in subsequent copies. Scholars believe the New
Testament manuscripts to be the most frequently
copied and widely distributed books of antiquity.
The abundance of Scriptural manuscript copies
have made it possible to reconstruct the original
text with virtually complete accuracy. The
authenticity of the New Testament text we
have today rests on the foundation of a massive
amount of historical documentation. 26
Such evidence provides good reason to acknowledge the basic authority and reliability
of the Bible.
7. Answering Objections to the Authority of the
Bible
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to appraise and formulate responses to three
common objections to the reliability and authority of the Bible.
Despite the evidence, many people have questions about the Bible.
They ask: How could the Bible, written by fallible human, claim to
be authoritative over our lives? Wasn't the Bible corrupted over time?
What about other "gospels" and ancient texts that were excluded
Allways chek four
speling misteaks
from the Bible? Let's take a look at each of these objections.
Objection 1: The Bible was written by human beings. To answer
ІППП
this objection, we must first decide whether people are capable of
ОПППІ
saying or writing anything that is true. If so, would they not be
capable of truthfully writing down what God told them to? Apologist
Greg Koukl makes this point through a series of questions:
"Do you have any books in your library? Were those books written
by humans? Do you find any truth in them? Is there a reason you
think the Bible is less truthful or reliable than other books you
own? Do people always make mistakes in what they write? Do you
• textual variants:
differences between
particular words,
phrases, or passages
within multiple copies
of the same ancient
manuscript
think that if God did exist, he would be capable of using humans
to write down exactly what he wants? If not, why not?"
The Bible describes the origin of Scripture as a process that is both human and divine.
Except in cases where God gave specific messages to the writers, God did not dictate what
they wrote (overriding their personalities), nor did the authors write their own personal
ideas about God. Instead, God inspired the authors, who then communicated God's truth
using their own writing styles:
2 Samuel 23:2: "The Spirit of the LoRD speaks by me; his word is on my tongue."
2 Peter 1:20-21: "Knowing this first of all, that no prophecy of Scripture comes from
someone's own interpretation. For no prophecy was ever produced by the will of
man, but men spoke from God as they were carried along by the Holy Spirit."
Objection 2: The Bible has been corrupted. If the biblical material was copied over
and over again, wouldn't mistakes add up over time, corrupting the text? To answer
this question, we must understand the nature of copy mistakes. When scholars examine
multiple manuscripts, they compare them word by word, sentence by sentence. Often
textual variants arise, which are differences between particular words, phrases, or
passages within multiple copies of the same ancient manuscript. Because we have so many
manuscripts, the number of textual variants between the manuscripts is quite high.
CHAPTER 3 | 41
40 | CHAPTER 3


<!-- page-7 -->

& lost
gospels:
gnostic texts
written
sometime
between ad
200 and 400
The majority of textual variants are spelling errors, unclear readings, and obviously
questionable alterations in manuscripts.
If a variant of an ancient manuscript includes spelling differences, changes in word
order, and the use of synonyms, then it doesn't affect the meaning of the text and is not of
major concern. Variants in manuscripts that affect the meaning of the text are considered
more serious. In the end, fewer than 4,000 of
the original 400,000 variants have any real
significance at all for the meaning of the text,
and none affect any core doctrines.28
Objection 3: Important books have been
left out of the Bible. In 1945, the lost gospels,
gnostic texts written sometime between AD 200
and 400, were discovered in Egypt. Some of
these texts had the word gospel in the title.
The Da Vinci Code and similar fiction and
nonfiction works have popularized the myth
that the church unfairly suppressed these so-
called lost gospels.
Why were these lost gospels excluded from the biblical canon? The lost gospels fail all
three necessary criteria-apostolicity, orthodoxy, and pedigree-making them inferior
to the canonical writings in the New Testament. Most of these documents were written
in the second through fourth centuries, meaning that none were written by apostles
(apostolicity); nor were they widely accepted in the early church (pedigree). The theology
of many of the lost gospels is inconsistent with the teachings of earliest Christianity
(orthodoxy). Instead, the lost gospels are strongly influenced by gnosticism.? Gnosticism
is a heresy that affected the early church and that taught the material world was inherently
evil. It also taught that salvation can be obtained only through self-denial and esoteric
knowledge of divine reality. Because they believed that Jesus appearing in a body would
have corrupted his ministry, some gnostics taught that Jesus was merely a spirit who
appeared to be human. For these and other reasons, the lost gospels were ultimately left out
of the biblical canon.30
8. How Far Does God's Authority Extend?
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to summarize five areas of life that are under
God's authority.
We've seen that the Bible is supported by internal and external evidence, has been carefully
preserved, and can stand up to objections. But how far does the Bible's authority extend?
Ultimately, the Bible derives its authority from God. So, if the Bible is God's Word, nothing
escapes its authority, just as nothing escapes God's authority. Let's look at just a few areas
that are subject to God's authority as revealed in Scripture:
God has authority over culture. Time and again, the Bible shows believers are tempted
to embrace the values and morals of the surrounding cultures—-whether they were the
Canaanites in the Old Testament or Corinthians in the New Testament. Child sacrifice
and sex slavery were openly practiced in many ancient cultures. The prophets and apostles
regularly confronted these and other evil practices within their own cultures. These
practices cannot be legitimized as "true for the culture that practiced them. Instead,
God's standards of right and wrong are true for all cultures at all times.
God has authority over governments. Even the authority of nations is derived from and
dependent upon God, whether that authority is acknowledged or not. The Bible says the
nations will accomplish God's purposes. In response to Pilate, Jesus said, "You would have
no authority over me at all unless it had been given you from above" (John 19:11). Romans
13:1 says there is no authority except that which is from God. When governing authorities
conflict with the authority of God, Christians must obey God first (Acts 5:29).
God has authority over knowledge.
It is common for people to say, "I won't
believe something unless it can be proven
scientifically." They assume science to
be the most reliable means of knowing
• gnosticism: a heresy that
affected the early church and
that taught the material world
was inherently evil
truth. But to believe only what science can
prove excludes anything that cannot be
empirically demonstrated, including the
underlying principles of science itself. The
truth is, biblical writers were enabled by the
Holy Spirit to write more than they knew
and understood about science.
God has authority over our emotions. God commands that we love him and love others
(Luke 10:27). He even commands that we love our enemies and pray for them (Matthew
5:44). Truth is not determined by our feelings. Truth is not defined by what makes us
comfortable. Truth does not depend on how many people agree with it. Feelings can guide
us to truth, but they can also mislead us. We may feel good about things that are untrue
and bad about things that are true. In the end, we are called to accept God's authority
about what is true over how we might feel about it at any given moment.
God has authority over entertainment. Entertainers often speak about such wide-
ranging issues as abortion, the environment, and spirituality, and are considered
authoritative simply because millions of people listen to them. But fame is not the same as
authority. The popularity of an idea is not, in itself, an indication of the idea's truth. God
claims authority over the voices we listen to. He insists that we filter out what is not true
or not worth thinking about (Philippians 4:8).
CHAPTER 3 | 43
42 | CHAPTER 3


<!-- page-8 -->

9. Why Should We Submit to God's Authority?
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to describe the importance of examining and
evaluating all truth claims for accuracy.
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to explain why God wants people to obey him.
Submitting to God's authority, as revealed in the Bible, is a weighty matter. Some people
have no problem doing it. Others know they should obey God but struggle to do so. Still
others reject God's authority entirely. These different responses usually have something to
do with a person's early experiences of authority.
Our earliest experience with authority is one in which we tend to believe or obey our
parents, teachers, and pastors. At first, it doesn't even occur to us to doubt them. However,
over time we gradually learn that they are not expert authorities on everything. They can
be wrong. If we are rebellious, we might think this gives us the right to disobey or ignore
them entirely.
Some of us may have experienced abuse from those in authority. We know firsthand
how abusive authorities can seriously damage people's lives, so we reject or avoid
authorities. We may even be hesitant to accept God's authority.
Of course, in turning away from or disobeying our parents, teachers, and pastors, we
choose to obey someone else—usually our peers or popular cultural icons. We're selective,
often unreasonably so. We refuse our parents' "Because I said so" but unquestioningly obey
a rock star whose best argument is "Because I said so."
Accepting someone else's claims without question is merely to exchange one authority
for another. Instead, we should carefully evaluate their claims to see if they are true. We
must carefully examine the evidence for the Bible's authority for ourselves, rather than
simply accepting the views of skeptics. At the start of this chapter, we said many people
have questions about the Bible and its authority. Asking questions is a good thing. It
helps us to grow intellectually, as we think for ourselves.
But it must be done with a spirit of humility and genuine
openness to learning.
Of course, even if there is good evidence for God's
authority, not everyone will want to accept it. We may not
always want to obey him. We might find that his authority
upsets our agenda. Many see God as power-hungry and
domineering, but God is not like that. God is good! He
does not use his authority to abuse or manipulate us. God's
authority is not about controlling us or spoiling our fun.
Instead, he wants us to give him authority over our lives
because he knows that we can only find true life in him.
God's authority extends to the whole of our lives. We are told in Scripture to be
stewards of our minds (Romans 12:2; Ephesians 4:23; Colossians 3:2, 10), and our
physical bodies (1 Corinthians 6:12-20). We are told to be truthful, loving, generous,
and hospitable (Ephesians 4:15, 25; Romans 12:9-21). Obeying God leads to a life of
flourishing. With God, we can become all that he created us to be.
10. Conclusion
Submitting to authority requires faith in that authority. We must decide where we
will place our faith. Someone who boards an airplane puts his or her faith in physics,
engineering, the pilots, the air traffic control system, the maintenance crew, and an endless
number of other people and factors. This is not blind faith. People who fly trust the system
designed to put airplanes safely in the air. Is it possible their faith is misplaced? Yes. But no
one can live apart from ongoing faith in the systems and truths we have come to trust as
reliable or true.
Trust in God's authority is like trust in the airline system. It is not blind. In this
chapter, we have seen that God expresses his authority in Scripture, which is both
internally and externally trustworthy. Jesus claimed authority, and the accuracy of
biblical documents lends credence to
his claim. Jesus also showed trust in
the Old Testament revelation and lent
his authority to those who would later
write the New Testament. The authority
of Scripture has been transmitted to us
by careful copying over the centuries.
Finally, Scripture can stand up to the
toughest scrutiny.
We have come full circle. Bob Dylan,
a famous musician, was right: "You're
gonna have to serve somebody." But
whom? Some find they have a problem
with God's authority because they're not sure if he's good. Others don't want to accept
what the Bible says is best for human flourishing. Others honestly search, but they doubt
whether anyone can properly understand God's message as given through his Word. To
grapple with these difficulties, we will next study how to read the Bible.
ENDNOTES
" William Ernest Henley, "Invictus," in Poems (London: David Nutt, 1907), 119.
2 The phrase "long obedience in the same direction" comes, ironically from Fredrich Nietzsche, Beyond Good
and Evil (New York: Millennium Publications, 2014), 46. For his usage see The Selected Writings of Friedrich
Nietzsche (Radford, VA: Wilder, 2008), 471. Eugene Peterson appropriates the term in his book A Long
Obedience in the Same Direction: Discipleship in an Instant Society (Downers Grove, IL: Inter Varsity Press,
2000) as a figure of speech for following Christ.
"Gordon R. Lewis, "What Does It Mean that God Inspired the Bible?", in The Apologetics Study Bible, ed. J.
P. Moreland, Paul Copan, and Ted Cabal (Nashville: Holman Bible Publishers, 2017), 1516.
* Josh McDowell Ministry, "How Did Jesus View the Old Testament", bethinking.org, hteps://www.
bethinking.org/bible/q-how-did-jesus-view-the-old-testament.
'W. Gary Phillips, research provided to Jeff Myers, April 16, 2013.
°J. Warner Wallace, "The Case for the Reliability of the Old Testament (Downloadable Bible Insert)," Cold-
Case Christianity with J. Warner Wallace and Jimmy Wallace, May 2, 2018, https://coldcasechristianity.com/
writings/the-case-for-the-reliability-of-the-old-testament-bible-insert/.
CHAPTER 3 / 45
44 | CHAPTER 3
FOUNDATIONS G
© Does the Bible Have Authority?


<!-- page-9 -->

' Jeffrey Sheler, Is the Bible True? How Modern Debates and Discoveries Affirm the Essence of the Scriptures (San
Francisco: Harper Collins, 1999), 254.
• Lawrence Mykytiuk, "53 People in the Bible Confirmed Archaeologically," Biblical Archaeology Society,
September 14, 2001, https://www.biblicalarchaeology.org/daily/people-cultures-in-the-bible/people-in-the-
bible/50-people-in-the-bible-confirmed-archaeologically/.
'R. K. Harrison, Introduction to the Old Testament (Peabody, MA: Hendrickson, 2004), 125.
1° Harrison, Introduction to the Old Testament, 127.
"Harrison, Introduction to the Old Testament 128. See also Victor Matthews, Old Testament Parallels: Laws
and Stories from the Ancient Near East, 3rd ed. (Mahwah, NJ: Paulist Press, 2007), 137-38.
12 Harrison, Introduction to the Old Testament, 128. See also Matthews, Old Testament Parallels, 137-38.
"J. Warner Wallace, "From Reliable to Divine: Fulfilled Prophecy in the Old Testament," Cold-Case
Christianity with J. Warner Wallace and Jimmy Wallace, April 11, 2018, https://coldcasechristianity.com/
writings/from-reliable-to-divine-fulfilled-prophecy-in-the-old-testament/.
1 Barnes' Notes on the Bible, BibleHub.com, https://biblehub.com/commentaries/barnes/Isaiah/13.htm.
15 "Tyre would be attacked by many nations," AboutBibleProphecy.com, aboutbibleprophecy.com/
Ezekiel_26_3.htm.
16 Edom would be toppled and humbled," AboutBibleProphecy.com, aboutbibleprophecy.com/
Jeremiah_49_16htm.
" Jesus Film Project, "55 Old Testament Prophecies about Jesus," Jesus Film Project, January 4, 2018, https://
www.jesusfilm.org/blog-and-stories/old-testament-prophecies.html.
18 Quoted in Michael J. Wilkens and J. P. Moreland, Jesus under Fire: Modern Scholarship Reinvents the
Historical Jesus (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1996), 221-22.
19 F. F. Bruce, The New Testament Documents: Are They Reliable? (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1981). Other
examples from Acts include: (1) Acts 13:7-Cyprus became a senatorial province (as opposed to imperial
province) in 22 Bc, and thus the governor was rightly called proconsul Sergius Paullus; (2) Acts 16:12, 20,
35 —praetors (magistrates of Philippi) were attended by lictors (sergeants, who beat Paul and Silas with rods-
these titles are confirmed by the Roman writer Cicero); (3) Acts 17:6, 9—at Thessalonica, the term politarchs
(found in no other city) was corroborated by an inscription discovered there; (4) Acts 18:12—Achaia had
been a senatorial province only since AD 44, so the term proconsul for Gallio, who had arrived in July of AD
51, is entirely accurate.
2° John P. Meier, A Marginal Jew: Rethinking the Historical Jesus, vol. 2, Mentor, Message, and Miracles (New
York: Doubleday, 1994).
21 J. Warner Wallace, "Can We Construct The Entire New Testament from the Writings of the Church
Fathers?" Cold-Case Christianity with J. Warner Wallace and Jimmy Wallace, June 13, 2016, https://
coldcasechristianity.com/writings/can-we-construct-the-entire-new-testament-from-the-writings-of-the-
church-fathers/.
22 Garry K. Brantley, "The Dead Sea Scrolls and the Biblical Integrity," Apologetics Press, https://www.
apologeticspress.org/apcontent.aspx?category=13&carticle=357.
23 J. Wallace, "Can the Reliability of the Old Testament: A Trustworthy Process of Transmission," Cold-Case
Christianity with J. Warner Wallace and Jimmy Wallace, April 27, 2018, https://coldcasechristianity.com/
writings/establishing-the-reliability-of-the-old-testament-a-trustworthy-process-of-transmission/.
24 Warner Wallace, "Establishing the Reliability of the Old Testament."
25 Teri Dugan, "A Case for the Bible 101: Manuscript Evidence Part 3 - How did we get the New
Testament?" Truth, Faith, and Reason, March 16, 2018, https://truthfaithandreason.com/a-case-for-the-
bible-101-manuscript-evidence-part-3-how-did-we-get-the-new-testament/.
26 JMM Team, "Testing the Historical Reliability of the New Testament," Josh McDowell Ministry, January
10, 2018, https://www.josh.org/historical-reliability-new-testament/.
27 Gregory Koukl, Tactics: A Game Plan for Discussing Your Christian Convictions (Grand Rapids: Zondervan,
2009), 44.
28 Darrell L. Bock and Daniel B. Wallace, Dethroning Jesus: Exposing Popular Culturé's Ques to Unsear the
Biblical Christ (Nashville: Thomas Nelson, 2007), 60-72.
2) Sce Marvin Meyer, The Gnostic Gospels of Jesus: The Definitive Collection of Mystical Gospels and Secret Books
about Jesus of Nazareth (New York: Harper One, 2005).
30 The writings of many of the church fathers are still widely available. For example, see Aguins Heresies
by St. Irenaeus of Lyons, Project Gutenberg, http://self.gurenberg.org/article/WHEBN00000154141
Irenaeus#Scripture.v.
CHAPTER 3 | 47
46 | CHAPTER3
