# Chapter 5

<!-- page-1 -->

The Bible
a Story
as
1. Tell Me a Story
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to explain the importance of stories.
Did your parents ever read you a bedtime story? Did you ever read one to a sibling? Maybe
you looked through a few titles before you picked one. Was it Goodnight Moon? Llama
Llama Red Pajama? The Chronicles of Narnia? Do you have a favorite story?
Of course, stories aren't only for children. While not everyone likes reading stories,
most people, including adults, enjoy hearing a good story. And sometimes the best stories
are not in books. You see a photograph or souvenir and ask your grandma about it. She
tells you the story of that vacation she took with your
grandad long ago, and how wonderful and strange and
funny it was. Or, you learn something that you never
suspected: Your father once broke his leg when he lost
control of his sled and slid into a tree. Your mother won
a race. Your uncle met someone famous.
Stories are everywhere. They shape us and how we
see the world. "Human beings have been telling stories
as long as there's been a language to tell them in. We
think in stories, remember in stories, and turn just
about everything we experience into a story, sometimes adjusting or omitting facts to
make it fit." One Summit student put it this way:
It is difficult to understate the importance of story. Stories can expand our world...
Telling and listening to stories is how we figure out who we are. For many of us, some
of our earliest childhood memories are of stories we were told and how they made us
feel. Do you remember the disgust you felt at the selfishness of Cinderella's stepsisters?
Or the awe inspired by the courage of Sir Gawain? Do you remember that your first
concepts of sacrifice, loyalty, and justice were formed from [the] substance of fairy
tales? These stories gave us our first heroes, our first concept of who we wanted to
be [and] our first villains, instilling within us a deep hatred of darkness, evil, and
selfishness.... Whether fiction or nonfiction, stories are a path to self-discovery, a tool
of self-examination, and a measuring stick of character. ... The kind of characters we
identify with are formative of our own
self-concept. We decide who we will be
based off of who we admire?
Stories are how we make sense of
reality. They guide us through life just as
the stars and constellations guided ancient
explorers across uncharted lands and seas.
"Story is a metaphor for life," says
WHAT'S
YOUR
STORY?
award-winning author and storyteller
Robert McKee. He explains that "Story
is not only our most prolific art form but
rivals all activities—work, play, eating,
exercise-for our waking hours. We tell
and take stories as much as we sleep—and
even then, we dream. Why? Why is so
much of our life spent inside stories? Because ... stories are equipment for living. Stories
clearly have power to influence our lives. Let's take a closer look at how stories work.
CHAPTER 5 | 63


<!-- page-2 -->

2. Elements of a Story
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to list the different components of well-formed
narratives.
Stories are conveyed in various forms: fables
and fairytales, poems and songs, epics and
essays, plays and movies, limericks and jokes.
• narrative:
an account of
related events or
experiences told
to listeners
or readers
They can be fiction or nonfiction, oral or
written, long or short, simple or complex,
funny or sad. Another word for story is a
narrative.
A narrative is an account of related events or
experiences told to listeners or readers.
Just as there are certain rules for
constructing buildings that are safe and
enjoyable to see and inhabit, so there are rules
for constructing good stories. There are many
different shapes and sizes of buildings, but the good ones have certain structural elements
in common. The same is true of stories. The main components of well-written stories, or
narratives, are:
• Setting: a time and a place
• Characters: a protagonist (hero), an antagonist (villain), and a supporting cast
• Conflict: a problem to solve or a challenge to overcome
• Theme: the message or idea the author is interested in communicating
• Plot: the storyline, with a beginning, middle, and end
• Point of view: who is telling the story and in what tense (past, present, future)*
The plot of a story is especially important. Most stories have a three-act structure that
begins with a setup-
- introducing us to the characters, setting up the location and time of
the story, giving us a feel for the story's universe. This is also the part where some kind of
conflict is introduced. In the second act, the protagonist confronts the conflict and deals
with various obstacles in the way of the goal. Sometimes, around the midpoint of the
story, something happens that increases the drama or sets the story on a new trajectory. In
the third and final act, the conflict builds to the climax and then ultimately resolves either
happily or tragically.
How an author chooses to tell a story is a part of the story too. The meaning of a story
is partly communicated by the author's tone and style. Compare the different tones and
styles of Dr. Seuss and J. R. R. Tolkien. Both are great storytellers, though their styles are
radically different. Dr. Seuss' style involves a lot of rhyming and his tone is whimsical.
Tolkien's style is epic, while his tone is usually quite serious.
A story can also have diversity within unity. Like the blending of colors in a painting,
unity is a coming together of a multitude of details. In a good story, the reader eventually.
sees how all of the details fit together. That's why a series of random events does not
constitute a story. There needs to be a connecting thread that helps us see how the events
work together to form a narrative.
If vou think about it, each of our lives is a story. They have a plot—-a beginning, a
middle and an end, with lots of interesting characters and conflict along the way. The
problem for us is that we don t know how exactly our stories are going to end or even
what's going to be in tomorrow's chapter. Sometimes, our lives can feel like a series of
random events. And what is the tone of our stories? Is life basically comic, tragic, or
something in between? How can we make sense of our individual stories if we don't even
know where they are going? To answer these questions, we need a metanarrative.
3. What Is a Metanarrative?
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to discuss the relationship between
metanarratives, worldviews, and the meaning of life.
What's a metanarrative? Narrative means story, and meta means beyond. A metanarrative
is the story beyond the story; an overarching narrative that makes sense of the world.
A metanarrative provides a single, overarching interpretation, or grand story, showing
how different stories make sense within a larger story. For example, in the musical Into
the Woods, the stories of Little Red Riding Hood, Rapunzel, Cinderella, and Jack and
the Beanstalk are incorporated into the larger story of
a couple's quest to have a child. This quest provides
the metanarrative within which all the other stories fit
together and make sense.
Not all metanarratives are fiction; there are
nonfiction metanarratives as well. The history of the
United States, for example, can be seen as a collection of
related immigration stories. From the European traders
who met the Native Americans already here, to the
Pilgrims and Puritans who sought religious freedom;
from the plight of enslaved Africans to that of Irish
people fleeing the Great Famine in the mid 1800s;
& metanarrative: the story
beyond the story; an
overarching narrative that
makes sense of the world
from Germans seeking farmland to Chinese building
railroads, the story of America can be told as a great
metanarrative encompassing the ways its diverse people sought freedom and opportunity?
One of the most popular metanaratives in our culture today is the Marvel Cinematic
Universe (MCU). As one pastor and movie critic explains.
Every human being is hungry for a single overarching storyline that ties all of our smaller
stories together. Since 2008, evidence for this hunger has been as close as your nearest
cinema. That's when the release of Iron Man marked the genesis of the Marvel Cinematic
Universe. ... The MCU includes a multiplicity of individual narratives. Taken together,
these storylines form a master narrative—a metanarrative-that turns out to be as vast
as the universe itself.&
CHAPTER 5 | 65
64 | CHAPTER 5


<!-- page-3 -->

Suppose you knew nothing about the Marvel Cinematic Universe and the first movie
you watched was Captain America: Civil War. You might have a hard time understanding
exactly what was going on. But if you had watched all of the movies that came before it, you
would be able to make much more sense of that particular movie. The Marvel Cinematic
Universe provides the metanarrative that gives meaning to, and explains, how all of
the individual movies fit together.
Before the MCU, there was the Star Wars metanarrative created by George
Lucas. With Star Wars, Lucas wanted to tell "an old myth in a new
way."' A myth is similar in many ways to a metanarrative. In
ancient times, mythical stories about gods and heroes helped people
to explain the world and the origin and history of a people. In Star
Wars, Lucas uses the mythical story of the hero's journey (in which
a hero character sets out on a quest, confronts a challenge, and
returns changed), to highlight the struggle between good and
evil in the galaxy. Each character in the Star Wars universe has
such a journey, but their stories all come together in the great
battle between good and evil in the galaxy.!°
Lucas believes that this mythical story, or metanarrative, can help us make sense of
our own world. Lucas sees "Star Wars as taking all the issues that religion represents and
trying to distill them down into a more modern and easily accessible construct.""!
The concept of metanarrative is fundamentally wrapped up with the meaning of life.
In Star Wars, the initially selfish Han Solo finds meaning and purpose outside of making
money when he realizes that he has become part of a bigger story-resistance to the evil
empire. Young Jakku scavenger Rey discovers her "destiny" when she realizes that she is
an heir to the ancient Jedi tradition.
In the same way, we can see our own stories as part of a bigger story—a metanarrative
that gives meaning and purpose to the seemingly random events of our lives.
4. Worldviews as Metanarratives
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to describe and critique the postmodern view of
metanarratives.
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to compare and contrast common non-Christian
worldviews.
However, not everyone thinks that metanarratives can provide meaning to our lives. The
term metanarrative was made popular by a 1979 book! on postmodernism, which argued
that religious metanarratives can't be trusted:
[Postmodernists] generally do not accept any overarching story that gives meaning to
all of life. Instead, they focus on small, individual narratives that give meaning to their
own lives. A metanarrative speaks of absolute, universal truth. An individual narrative
speaks of what is "true for me" and "gives meaning to my life." Postmodern thinking
rejects.. universal truth.13
According to the postmodernist, there is no big story that makes sense of all the other
stories. We can only find meaning and purpose in our own story. But we don't even know
what will happen in the next chapter of our lives. Stuck in the middle of our story, its
hard to know how we should live it.
It turns out that all people, even postmodernists, need a metanarrative to make sense of
their lives. The postmodern metanarrative claims that there is no universal truth, and that
someone who makes a truth claim is usually oppressing others. Do you see how this itself
is a metanarrative that helps postmodernists to explain and make sense of the world?
Another way of talking about metanarratives is to talk about worldview. As you
may remember from Chapter 1, a worldview is "a pattern of ideas and beliefs that help
us make sense of the world and that guide our decisions and actions." All worldviews
offer a metanarrative that claims to explain or give meaning to life and the events in it.
Worldviews provide answers to the biggest questions we ask, such as: Where did I come
from? Who am I? What is my purpose in life? What is wrong with this world: What is the
solution? Where am I going after I die? and How should I live?
Here are some of the most popular worldviews today:
• Secularism: An atheistic/agnostic worldview that puts its faith in human
ability and progress to make the world a better place
• New spirituality: A worldview that teaches that everything is god
and that peace and harmony come from getting in touch with divine
consciousness
• Postmodernism: A worldview that tends to be skeptical of all truth claims
and rejects the idea that metanarratives can provide meaning to life
• Marxism: A worldview that sees all of history as class warfare and that
aims for a future utopian, atheistic state where everything is held in
common by the people
• Islam: A theistic worldview, centered on the life of the prophet
Muhammad, that derives its understanding of the world from the
teachings of the Quran, Hadith, and Sunnah
While there are many different worldviews, all worldviews are not equally valid. Each
provides its own answers to the big questions of life, and they can't all be true. How can
we know which worldview is best? We don't just want a worldview that sounds nice or
helps us to get by. We need a worldview that is footed in realicy, in the way things actually
are—a worldview that helps us to live meaningful and fulflling lives. We believe that the
Christian worldview offers a metanarrative that helps to explain the world as it really is
and provides meaningful answers to the biggest questions of life.
CHAPTER 5 | 67
66 | CHAPTER 5
FOUNDATIONS 5


<!-- page-4 -->

5. The Bible as a Metanarrative
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to summarize the metanarrative of the Bible.
As you learned in previous chapters, the Bible is a diverse collection of writings by
many different authors. Even a quick glance shows that it doesn't resemble a textbook,
encyclopedia, or other books whose primary purpose
is to list facts. The Bible's various books were written
over 1,500 years. They address distinct audiences and
historical circumstances. Yet the Bible is not a random
jumble of disconnected stories. Rather, its many stories
tell one big story, or metanarrative, centered on God's
working in and through his people. The story's climax
is reached with the fully divine and fully human Jesus
o historical narrative:
a historical account told
in story form
Christ: his birth, life, death, resurrection, ascension,
and coming return.
About half of the Bible can be classified as
historical narrative, which is a historical account told
in story form." To be clear, though, the Bible is not just a report of facts about the past; it
is a story based on history, on reality. It tells us about life in the world as it actually is. And
as we saw in Chapter 3, there is good evidence for the Bible's historical accuracy.
There are other parts of the Bible that aren't strictly historical narrative, such as
wisdom literature, poetry, prophecies, and letters. But these parts were written within the
historical narrative. The historical narrative establishes a trajectory from the beginning of
God's story to the end. The Bible tells a story that is diverse but unified, with conflict and
resolution, and an overarching plot that holds the story together.
If God is the ultimate author of Scripture, it makes sense that the details and subplots
of the Bible come together in one coherent story, by the inspiration of the Holy Spirit. As
theologian John Piper reminds us:
In profound ways, the whole Bible-the whole of redemptive history—exists to create a
place and time and meaning where particular, individual, finite humans can encounter
its stunning parts. The parts make up the whole, and so serve the whole. They would
have no meaning and no beauty without the whole. But it is just as important to say
that the whole exists to give place and time and meaning to the parts so that the parts
can be known and experienced and enjoyed.!
By engaging with the metanarrative of Scripture, we can find individual meaning for
our own stories as we learn about who God is, how he works with his people, and what his
ultimate plan is for us.
The Bible tells the story of the world, where God's very existence is the prelude. The
world it describes is God's world—a world he created out of love, a world flooded with his
creative majesty. As one poet put it, "the world is charged with the grandeur of God."!?
God speaks first in Genesis 1:3: "Let there be light." A simple sentence. No hammering,
no sawing. Just the sound of God's voice turning nothing into something.
When God commanded it to, impenetrable murkiness became brilliantly illuminated.
Plants and animals came to life. And then God created human beings, his image-bearers,
and told them: *Be fruitful and multiply and fill the earth and subdue it and have
dominion...? And God saw every ching that he had made, and behold, it was very good"
(Genesis 1:28-31).
In Hebrew, the phrase very good is towb me od. It means exceedingly, heartbreakingly,
abundantly, richly, loudly, immeasurably good in a festive, generous, happy intelligent,
charming, splendid way!
And yet humanity has fallen under evi's assault and has been catapulted into vast
spiritual and moral darkness. But, like in The Hobbit, when daylight broke just in time to
turn the trolls into stone, Paul tells us that hope broke through into our world-just in
time. "When the fullness of time had come, God sent forch his Son" (Galatians 44).
We know this story because it was written down. And we know how this grand story
turns out. We know that God is, in Christ, "making all things new" (Revelation 21:5).
6. Comprehensive, Coherent, and Normative
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to defend the Bible as a historical metanarrative.
As we have said, the Bible is not a pleasant fiction. It is a true story, a metanarrative
grounded in history. In addition to its narrative structure and historical basis, theologians
also speak of the Bible as being comprehensive, coherent, and normative! Let's take a look
at what each of these words means in relation to the Bible.
First, the Bible is comprehensive, which means to be complete, including everything that
is necessary or relevant. This does not mean the Bible addresses everything we would like it
to, nor does it satisfy all our curiosities. For example, while the Bible speaks of the reality
of a tempter (the serpent in Genesis 3) in the
garden of Eden, it does not tell us where this
tempter came from (except that God created
him) or why the tempter is in the garden. The
Bible does not tell us all we would like to know
about science or history. The Bible also does
not tell us where or if we should go to college
or whom we should marry (or if we should get
married). What the Bible does tell us is all we
& comprehensive
to be complete,
including
everything
that is
necessary or
relevant
need to know about God to live meaningfully
and faithfully in his world.
Second, despite its diversity, the Bible is
coherent. To be coherent means to be orderly,
logical, and consistent throughout. It means the parts stick together and don't clash or
contradict each other. The many individual stories in the Bible, from different authors,
cultures, countries, and centuries, can be pieced together like a jigsaw puzzle. The pieces
themselves may have rough edges and might seem incompatible with each other, but pur
together in the right way, they form one coherent picture.
CHAPTER 5 | 69
68 | CHAPTER 5
FOUNDATIONS 9


<!-- page-5 -->

It is remarkable how the Bible is coherent, given that it was written over such a long
period of time by many authors who often didn't even know each other. Imagine a group
of strangers trying to write a story over 1,000 years. With
all the changes that happen in culture combined with
the different styles of each author, it would be hard to
keep things consistent throughout. And yet the Bible is
miraculously coherent, pointing to its divine inspiration,
the Holy Spirit, guiding the hands of so many authors to
tell one coherent story!
A norm is the accepted standard by which we judge
something. An inch is an inch because it complies with an
agreed-upon unit of measurement. Therefore, the Bible is
normative.
& coherent: to be
orderly, logical, and
consistent throughout
To say the Bible is normative means that it is setting
norms or standards, especially when it comes to behavior.
The Bible being normative means that it reveals the
God-given standard for how people should live. Because
the biblical metanarrative gives us a true picture of reality,
it cuts through our false notions, exposes our sinfulness, and calls for a response from
everyone who interacts with it. As Scripture puts it: "The word of God is living and active,
sharper than any two-edged sword, piercing to the division of soul and of spirit, of joints
and of marrow, and discerning the thoughts and intentions of the heart. And no creature
is hidden from his sight, but all are naked and exposed to the eyes of him to whom we
must give account" (Hebrews 4:12-13).
The historical metanarrative of Scripture is comprehensive, coherent, and normative.
But how could the biblical authors write such a coherent book?
7. Caught Up in a Bigger Story
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to identify biblical characters who were aware
they were part of God's larger story.
The internal coherence of the Bible is primarily due to divine inspiration. However, it is also
worth observing that the biblical authors, though they may not have known or understood
the details of the whole story, seem overwhelmingly conscious of the fact they were
operating within a larger narrative.
The people who spoke and eventually wrote down what became the Old Testament
were aware they were part of God's story. In several instances God spoke directly to them
and told them the part they had to play. The phrase, "Thus says the LorD" occurs more
than 400 times in the English Standard Version of the Old Testament. Other phrases also
convey the same idea. The human authors knew the story didn't originate with them or
end with them. Prophets like Isaiah and Jeremiah spoke of a future day when God would
return to rule the world with justice and righteousness, giving his people new hearts so
they might truly love God and neighbor.
The same awareness can be seen in the New Testament. The people in Jesus life knew
hey were part of something special. Mary, his mother, sensing her part in a bigger story,
sang a song we now know as th story, ignitcat, a beautiful statement about God's faithfulness
and deliverance (Luke 1:46-55 story, chariah, the tather of Jesus' cousin John the Baptist,
was skeptical at first; however, he later realized the events he witnessed were a part of
God's grand narrative (Luke 1:67-79). Simeon and Anna, prophets in the temple, also
sensed God's grand story when they spoke blessings over the infant Jesus (Luke 2.29-38).
Mark 1:14-15 records the beginning of jesu ministry: "Now after John was arrested,
Jesus came into Galilee, proclaiming the gospel of God, and saying, "The time is fulflled,
and the kingdom of God is at hand; repent and believe in the gospel." By recording Jesus
words that "The time is fulfilled," Mark demonstrated his awareness that the story of Jesus
is part of a larger story — a story that began all the way back in Genesis and is reaching its
climax in the ministry of Jesus.
In Romans 1:1-5 we learn that Paul saw his own ministry in light of the big story that
began with God's promises to Israel and extended to all nations. Peter also recognized that
those who believe in Christ are part of a larger story (1 Peter 1:3-13).
All throughout Scripture, God's servants are people who sense they are part of something
bigger than themselves, something God is doing all over the world and throughout the ages.
Each of them was caught up in a bigger story. As believers, we too are invited to play our part
in the great story that God is telling. But how does that bigger story play out?
8. Outline of the Biblical Story
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to describe the six main acts in the biblical
metanarrative and their corresponding Scriptures.
There are several ways to understand the metanarrative of Scripture. Numerous
theologians have developed charts and maps for helping people understand the outline
of Scripture. In this textbook, we have chosen to follow the outline presented by Craig
Bartholomew and Michael Goheen in their book
The Drama of Scripture? This outline describes the
biblical metanarrative in a six-act structure, with
an interlude between act three and four. You can
think of each act as an act in a play. The chart on the
next page (figure 5.a) allows us to see the Bible as
one great metanarrative, which tells the story of the
world beginning with God's creation and leading all
• normative:
setting norms
or standards,
14 15 16 17 18
especially
when it comes
to behavior
the way up to the final restoration of all things.
In Chapters 6-12, we'll unpack this
metanarrative in greater detail. As we do, we'll see
that it is not just a story about the past and the
future, but a story about God, humans, the world,
and everything in it——a story in which we find meaning and purpose for our lives now. We
are characters in this great drama. We have a part to play!
CHAPTER 5 | 71
CHAPTER 5


<!-- page-6 -->

72 | CHAPTER 5
One theologian summarizes the biblical metanarrative like this: "God the Father
has reconciled his created but fallen world through the death of his Son, and renews it
into a Kingdom of God by his Spirit. Note the (terms] created, fallen, reconciled, renews,
and Kingdom of God. Each of these terms applies to the whole cosmos and not just to
individuals."'' So, while the great story provides meaning and purpose for our individual
lives, it also offers meaning and purpose for the whole world. Through this great
metanarrative, we have been invited into something bigger than ourselves.
Acts in the Biblical
Metanarrative
Description
Primary Texts
God creates a good world where humans, made
Act 1: Creation-
God's Good World
in God's image, can live in harmony with him,
Genesis 1-2
themselves, others, and creation.
Sin corrupts God's world, leading to evil, the
Act 2: The Fall-Sin
and Its Consequences
breakdown of relationships, and death.
Genesis 3-11
God chooses Abraham's family to be a blessing
Act 3: Israel—
Redemption Initiated
to the whole world by making them a kingdom of
Torah, Prophets,
Writings
priests and a holy people.
After their failure to be faithful to God, subsequent
Interlude: The
Second Temple
Period
exile, and return to Israel, the people of God wait for
a Messiah as they strive to obey God in the midst of
Ezra, Nehemiah,
Esther, Daniel;
Second Temple
literature
foreign empires.
Jesus comes to Earth to announce the kingdom of
Act 4: Redemption
Initiated-Jesus
God. He lives a sinless life, is crucified, and rises from
Gospels
the dead in triumph over evil, sin, and death. He
makes reconciliation possible.
Jesus ascends and the Holy Spirit empowers
Act 5: Restoration
Initiated-The Church
God's people, the church, to spread the good news
Acts, Epistles
through their proclamation and practice as they
await the full restoration of all things.
Act 6: Restoration
Accomplished-New
Creation
Jesus returns to Earth at the end of history to judge
everyone and establish the kingdom of God. Sin is
Revelation
banished forever, and all things are made new.
figure 5.a
9. Meeting the Author
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to express what God's role in the biblical
metanarrative is.
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to articulate the importance of knowing that the
Bible is a metanarrative when interpreting difficult passages.
Reading the Bible as a metanarrative has important implications for how we understand
God. God reveals himself, not by giving us a few facts about himself, but rather
through the way he acts in the world and interacts with human beings. From Genesis
to Revelation, God is active in his story, like a director who is also acting in a movie he
wrote. He does not sit by and watch history unfold from the sidelines. He gets involved.
FOUNDATIONS 9
We see this in his faithfulness to Israel, in his commitment to his creation, and ultimately
in Jesus sacrifice on the cross—saf ur because God loves the world and all the people
he created.
However, as you read through the Bible, you
will likely find passages that are troubling and
confusing, or that lead to difficult questions,
such as "If God loves everyone, why was slavery
permitted in the Old Testament?" or "Why
We can see that God
is good, wise, and
knowledgeable.
did God command the Israelites to invade the
land of Canaan?" Isolated from the big story,
troubling texts can make God seem petty or
vindictive. This is why it is so important to
understand the metanarrative. Over time, we
will begin to see how troubling passages fit
within the whole. This is not to explain them away or minimize the difficulties. It is to say
that through the careful reading of Scripture and the illumination of the Holy Spirit, we
can see that God is good, wise, and knowledgeable.
God patiently instructs, chastens, protects, delivers, and restores his people. He is
faithful. As the Creator of this world, he is absolutely committed to us, and his
commitment knows no bounds. As C. S. Lewis once said of Jesus:
The great thing to remember is that, though our feelings come and go, His love for us
does not. It is not wearied by our sins, or our indifference; and, therefore, it is quite
relentless in its determination that we shall be cured of those sins, at whatever cost to
us, at whatever cost to Him.?
God will always pursue redemption for his creation. Understanding the way God's love
undergirds his every action provides a strong counterpoint to the common impression that
God is brooding, grumpy, mean, and distant.
There is much to learn, and we must not assume our finite minds can understand
everything. Knowing God through Scripture is a lifelong endeavor. One of the reasons
the Bible is so rich as a literary work, apart from its value as God's Word, is there is so
much to discover in each of its books-and even more to be learned as the whole grand
story unfolds.
10. Conclusion
Understanding the metanarrative of Scripture will help us understand ourselves and the
part we play in this cosmic drama. We are image-bearers of God, made for a relationship
with our Creator. From Genesis onward, we learn that the sovereign Creator has chosen
human beings to share this life—-and eternity-with him. We learn that we are broken
by sin and unable to save ourselves or set the world right. We also learn that we are so
Loved by God that he sent Jesus to give his life for us! The Father's plan of redemption and
CHAPTER 5 | 73


<!-- page-7 -->

restoration, promised in the garden of Eden and previewed in Israel, finds its fulfillment
in Jesus and will one day be complete.
We are not mere spectators, passively watching the
story unfold. We are part of the story! "The world of the
Bible is our world," Bartholomew and Goheen remind us,
"and its story of redemption is also our story. This story
is waiting for an ending —in part because we ourselves
have a role to play before all is concluded. We must
therefore pay attention to the continuing biblical story of
redemption."23
Each of our stories matters to God, and we find
meaning and purpose in his great story. In the next
chapter we will explore the first part of the biblical
metanarrative: creation.
"Statistics vary. Robert L. Plummet, in 40 Questions about Interpreting the Bible Grand Rapids, Ml: Kregel.
2010), 191, cites "about 60 percent"st (0102 and NT combined. Gordon D. Fee and Douglas Stuart, in How
10 Read the Bible for All Ts Worth, 3rd ed. (Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2003), 89, suges Shar over Ho
percent" of the OT is narrative.
"John Piper, "The Great Story and the Single Verse," Desiring God, October 24, 2012, https://www.
desiringgod.org/articles/the-great-story-and-the-single-verse.
"Se "God's Grandeur" by Gerard Manley Hopkins, Poetry Foundation, http://www.poetryfoundarion.org/
poem/173660
19Sce "meod" Strong's Hebrew reference number 3966, and "tob" Strong's Hebrew reference number 2896a,
in Robert L. Thomas, New American Standard Exhaustive Concordance of the Bible/Hebrew-Aramaic and Grecke
Dictionaries, updated ed. (Nashville, TN: Holman Bible Publishers, 1981).
1' The focus on comprehensive and normative is discussed in Craig G. Barholomew and Michael W. Goheen,
The Drama of Scripture: Finding Our Place in the Biblical Story (Grand Rapids: Baker, 2004), 20.
20 This chart is adapted from the outline of the biblical metanarative in Craig G. Bartholomew and Michael
Goheen, The Drama of Scripture: Finding Our Place in the Biblical Story, 2nd ec., (Grand Rapids: Baker,
2014). The titles have been slightly modified.
"'Art Lindsley, "Creation, Fall, Redemption," Knowing & Doing Winter 2009): 1, https://www.
cslewisinstitute.org/Creation_Fall_Redemption_pagel. Lindley was citing the Dutch Reformed theologian
Herman Bavinck.
22C. S. Lewis, Mere Christianity (New York: HarperCollins, 2017), 133.
23 Bartholomew and Goheen, The Drama of Scripture, 213.
ENDNOTES
Carl Alviani, "The Science behind Storytelling," Protagonist Studio, October 11, 2018, https://medium.
com/the-protagonist/the-science-behind-storytelling-51169758b22c.
'Anne-Louise Cook, "Give Me a Story: A Week with Dr. Williams," Summit Ministires, October 19, 2016,
https://www.summit.org/blog/semester/give-me-a-story-a-week-with-dr-williams/.
Robert McKee, Story: Substance, Structure, Style, and the Principles of Screenwriting (New York: ReganBooks,
1997), 11.
"Chris Drew, "The 8 Elements of a Story - Explained for Students!," Helpful Professor.com, https://
helpfulprofessor.com/story-elements/.
'Glen C. Strathy, "Syd Field's Model of Screenplay Structure," How To Write A Book Now, https://www.
how-to-write-a-book-now.com/Syd-Field.html.
6"Synopsis: Into the Woods," Utah Shakespeare Festival, https://www.bard.org/study-guides/synopsis-into-
the-woods.
7"U.S. Immigration Timeline," History.com, https://www.history.com/topics/immigration/immigration-
united-states-timeline.
Timothy Paul Jones, "Culture: The Marvel Cinematic Universe and the Metanarrative of God," November
12, 2018, TimothyPaulJones.com, https://www.timothypauljones.com/culture-the-marvel-cinematic-
universe-and-humanitys-hunger-for-a-metanarrative/.
9"The Mythology of "Star Wars' with George Lucas," BillMoyers.com, June 18, 1999, https://billmoyers.com/
mythology-of-star-wars-george-lucas/.
1°Gene Stansel, "Star Wars and "The Hero's Journey," February 23, 2016, Westminster Presbyterian Church,
PCA, https://www.wpcgreenwood.org/blog/post/star-wars-and--the-heros-journey.
"BillMoyers.com, "Mythology of Star Wars."
Jean-François Lyotard, La condition postmoderne: rapport sur le savoir (Paris: Les Éditions de Minuit, 1979),
translated into English as The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge (Minneapolis, MN: University
of Minnesota Press, 1984), xxiv, xx, 34, 37.
13"What Is a Metanarrative?," Got Questions, https://www.gotquestions.org/metanarrative.html.
14 For a fuller explanation of this idea of being stuck in the middle of a story, see lain Provan, Seriously
Dangerous Religion: What the Old Testament Really Says and Why It Matters (Waco, TX, Baylor University
Press, 2014), 1-5.
CHAPTER 5 | 75
74 | CHAPTER 5
