# Chapter 6

<!-- page-1 -->

Act 1: Creation
1. Creation Stories
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to explain the purpose of creation myths.
Every story has a beginning. In the ancient world, there were many stories about how
everything came to be, called creation myths. A creation myth is a story that explains the
nature of reality and how the universe and human beings came about. These myths help
answer questions like: Who am I? What is my place in the world? What is my relationship
to nature, other people, and the divine? and How should I live?
& creation myth: a story that
explains the nature of reality
and how the universe and
human beings came about
Not all creation myths claim
to be "true" in the historical sense,
but they are all intended to convey
essential truths about the world.
Creation myths provide an all-
embracing account of the nature of
reality and our place within it.
Almost every culture has some
kind of creation myth. Many ancient
creation myths begin with chaos or
warfare between the gods; others
with sexual intercourse or a seed or egg. Some include bizarre and grotesque details about
how things came to be. Consider a tew examples:
• Egyptian: Life originates in the primordial waters. The creator-god Ra creates himself
and then creates other gods from his body!
• Tahitian: The god Ta'aroa emerges from a shell and creates the world, using one half
of the shell for the sky and the other half for the earth.?
• Sumerian: The god Enlil uses a hoe to separate the heavens and the earth and causes
humans to "sprout" from the ground."
Many people approaching the Bible for the first time find its creation story to be
equally strange. In fact, a survey of the creation myths from the ancient world reveals
some similarities between the Genesis creation story and pagan creation myths. These
similarities have led some scholars to conclude that Genesis relies on pagan myths to create
an origin story for Israel.*
Consider, for example, one of the most widely known creation myths from the ancient
world-the Enuma Elish. In this myth, the god of order (Marduk) slays the goddess of
chaos (Tiamat) and uses her body to create the cosmos. The account then describes the
creation of the world in similar ways to the biblical story in
Genesis. For example, both Genesis and the Enuma Elish
stories begin in darkness. Both show the creation of light,
the firmament, dry land, stars or luminaries, and the
creation of humans. Both stories show the deity resting?
But Genesis is not just another pagan myth. Christians
believe it is true and that Genesis 1-2 explains the nature
of reality and our place in the world. In this chapter, we'll
explore how the Genesis story teaches core truths about
God, humans, nature, and the universe itself. In the end,
we'll see how this story challenges both pagan myths and
alternative worldviews.
The gods Ra,
Ta'aroa, and
Enlil
CHAPTER 6 | 77


<!-- page-2 -->

2. Genesis 1
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to summarize the creation narrative from
Genesis 1.
The biblical creation story begins with the words "In the beginning, God created the
heavens and the earth" (Genesis 1:1). The Hebrew word Elohim (elöhim) is a name for the
Creator God used in the Old Testament. This is
a general designation for a deity or powerful
spiritual being.
& Elohim: a name for the
Creator God used in the Old
Testament
The Bible thus begins with two fundamental
claims. First, God exists. Second, God is the
Creator of everything else that exists.
While all Christians agree with these two
claims, discussions about Genesis 1 often get
bogged down in the creation versus evolution
debate or in whether the days of Genesis are
literal 24-hour days or longer periods of time.
As intriguing as these questions are, they go
beyond the purpose of this chapter. Instead, we
want to focus on how Genesis 1 highlights the purposefulness and orderliness of God's
creation. It shows a God who speaks creation into existence ex nihilo (out of nothing).
Genesis 1:2 says that "the earth was without form and void." The rest of the chapter
then sets out how God remedied this by forming the universe and filling it. This pattern
can be observed in comparing days 1-3 with days 4-6.
FORMING
FILLING
Day 1: light and darkness
Day 2: sky, atmosphere
Day 4: sun, moon, and stars
Day 5: birds and water creatures
Day 3: land and vegetation
Day 6: animals and humans
figure 6.a
God created in an orderly fashion through his spoken word. First, he gave shape to the
world (sky, for example), and then he filled it with life (birds, etc.). The text also repeatedly
emphasizes that all of God's creation is "good."
The high point of Genesis 1 comes in verse 26. Up until this point, God simply
spoke and "it was so" (v. 15). In verse 26, however, God said, "Let us make man human
beings] in our image, after our likeness." What did God mean by "us?" Christians
have traditionally interpreted this verse to mean that the "us" refers to the Trinity. This
interpretation makes sense if we consider Colossians 1:15-16, which identifies Jesus as the
Creator. Many scholars also see evidence of the Holy Spirit in the "Spirit of God" who was
"hovering over the face of the waters" (v. 2).
The "us' language indicated that something unique was about to happen. Alone among
all other created things, people were made in God's image. The Latin word imago Dei
refers to the idea that human beings were created in God's likenes. We'll explore what this
means in depth later, but for now, it
is essential to notice two things. First,
human beings, both male and female,
are made in God's image (v. 27). Second,
they are given a measure of authority and
responsibility. They are to "be fruitful
imago Dei:
the idea that human beings
were created in God's likeness
and multiply" and to have "dominion
over ... every living thing" (v. 28).
After creating humans, God said that
all he made was very good (v. 31). It's a
goodness full of great awe and wonder,
so good that it makes one want to burst
from sheer joy! The rest of the Bible
concurs, celebrating God's awesome power, wisdom, and creativity in creating the world
and everything in it, including human beings (see Psalms 8, 19, 104; Proverbs 8).
3. Genesis 2
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to discuss the account of the creation of humans
found in Genesis 2.
Genesis chapter 2 begins by showing that God "rested on the seventh day from all his
work" (v. 2). In the Bible, the number seven represents perfection or completion? The
seventh day thus represents the completion of God's work. Why did God need to rest
from his work? Did he get worn out? Did his work completely drain him of energy? A look
at the rest of the Bible reveals that this is not so. For example, Isaiah 40:28 says that God,
"the Creator," does not "faint or grow weary." God's rest isn't like collapsing on the couch
after a long day; rather, it is a rest in the satisfaction of a job well done.
After the brief overview of creation described in Genesis 1:1-2:3, the text zeroes in on
the special creation of humans. It also begins using the word Yahweh, from the Hebrew
for "I AM" (haya, shown in many English-language Bibles as "the LoRD"). Yahweh is the
personal and covenantal name for God used in the Old Testament.
Genesis 2:7 describes how the Lord God formed the man "from the ground and
breathed into his nostrils the breath of life." Then God placed the man in the garden of
Eden "to work it and keep it" (v. 15). This means that work is not the result of sin. On
the contrary, humans were created to work. If this sounds crazy to you, think of a time
when you put hard work into something you really cared about maybe learning an
instrument, building or designing something new, writing a poem, completing a school
project, or even just bringing order to a messy room. Isn't there something fulfilling about
accomplishing these tasks? That's because i's in our design to work.
CHAPTER 6 | 79
78 | CHAPTER 6


<!-- page-3 -->

In the garden where the man was placed, there were two special trees: the Tree of
Knowledge of Good and Evil and the Tree of Life (v. 9). God specifically instructed the man
not to eat from the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil "for in the day that you eat of
it you shall surely die" (v. 17). Beyond this one
command, the man had complete freedom to
work in the garden and enjoy the fruits of his
& Yahweh:
labor.
All was well in God's new creation except
the
personal
one thing: the man was alone. To remedy this
and
"not good" situation, God created another
covenantal
human—a woman. God said, "It is not good
name for
that the man should be alone; I will make him
God used
a helper fit for him" (v. 18). Some people have
in the Old
the impression that God created the woman as
Testament
an afterthought because the man was lonely.
Others have seen the woman as a mere helper to
the man, in a sort of secondary role. However, both of these interpretations are inaccurate.
For starters, the text does not say that the man was lonely. It says that he was alone and
that this was not good. This is because humans were not intended to exist in isolation. They
were created for relationship. Second, the Hebrew word for "helper," 'ézer, (v. 18) in no
way implies a second-class position. In fact, this same word is used to describe God in his
relationship to Israel (see Psalm 33:20, 70:5; Hosea 13:9).8
When the man sees the woman, he calls her "Woman" (Hebrew 'ishab) because she was
taken out of "Man" (Hebrew 'ish). The similarity of their names reflects their fundamental
equality; both are image-bearers, cooperating together in the task God has given them?
Their relationship is one of harmony and deep intimacy; they were "both naked and were
not ashamed" (v. 25).
4. God: The Creator
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to articulate various attributes of God including
his transcendence and immanence.
As the creation narrative unfolds in Genesis 1-2, we learn that humans are relational
beings. Specifically, Genesis sees us in four primary relationships—with God, self, other
people, and the natural world! In this section, let's look more closely at the God we are
meant to be in relationship with.
God is the main character in the first two chapters of Genesis (and, indeed, the whole
Bible). He is also the most active character—he speaks, creates, rests, commands, and
instructs. He is the one in charge, having absolute power and authority. However, God's
authority is not domineering or abusive. God uses his authority to create a beautiful world.
In Genesis 1-2, God is revealed as a creative, artistic Designer. As one philosopher said,
"God created the world by imagination'!!
Psalm 19:1 proclaims,
"The heavens declare the glory of God, and the sky above
proclaims his handiwork." The universe reflects the glory of God. Have you ever considered
80 | CHAPTER 6
the fact that the universe did not have to be as amazing and beautiful as it is? God didn't
have to make colors, sounds, beautiful landscapes, or tasty foods. The world could just as
easily have been a barren wasteland or a concrete jungle. But that would not reflect who
Cod is, because God loves beauty! The poet Gerard Manlev Hopkins got it right when he
declared, "The world is charged with the grandeur of God."12
But why did God create people and this amazing world? Did God create because he
was bored, lonely, or needy? No! In the Trinity, the Father God already had a loving
relationship with the Son (Jesus) and Holy Spirit (see Luke 3:22 and John 1724). God
did not need the world. God is an "outgoing, life-giving God." He created a world where
he could be known so that we might share in the love of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit
(Ephesians 1:4-5). This is why one theologian says, "the creation of all things is above all
an expression of God's will to love."14
Scripture also reveals that God is both
immanent and transcendent. Transcendence
refers to an attribute of God that describes him as
being both above and outside of his creation. He
is separate and outside of it.
The immanence of God is an attribute of
& transcendence:
an attribute of God that describes
him as being both above and
outside of his creation
God that describes him as being both within and
among his creation. This means that God is
active in his creation. Paul preached, "In him
we live and move and have our being" (Acts
17:28). Colossians 1:17 says that Jesus holds all
of creation together. If he removed his hand,
the universe would cease to exist!
In Chapter 13, we will discuss many more of God's attributes. For now, Genesis 1-2
reveals that God is transcendent, immanent, active, powerful, creative, generous, involved,
personal, and overflowing with a desire to pour out love on all creation!
5. Humans Beings: Rulers and Sub-Creators
› OBJECTIVE: You will be able to analyze three ways in which human beings
bear God's image.
Genesis 1:27 says that humans were made in the image of God. What does that mean?
The most common Christian views of what it means to be made in God's image can be
loosely categorized under three headings:
• Rule: This view connects the image of God with God's granting of authority to
humans to subdue and have dominion over creation (Genesis 1:28-30). In this view,
bearing God's image means that we are responsible for caring for, cultivating, and
bringing God's creation to abundance.
• Resemblance: This view says we are "like God" with respect to certain attributes we
share, such as intelligence, creativity, morality, and the ability to communicate.
• Relationship: This view says that we refect God's image by existing in loving
relationship with God, ourselves, other people, and nature!
CHAPTER 6 | 81


<!-- page-4 -->

Let's consider the first aspect: rule. Image (Hebrew selm, meaning shape, resemblance)
was a very important concept in the ancient Near Eastern culture in which the Bible was
written. Kings set up images of themselves in conquered cities to remind people who was
in charge. Such images symbolized authority over a certain domain." God's domain is the
entire universe, but he didn ' set up a statue of himself on Earth. Instead, he created living,
moving images: human beings. That's one reason why, in the rest of the Bible, we are
forbidden from making statues or images
of God—because we ourselves are God's
image (Exodus 20:4-6, Isaiah 44:9-20,
Jeremiah 51:17, Habakkuk 2:18-19).
In Genesis, people are given great
authority and responsibility in God's
domain (Genesis 1:28-30). Stewardship is
the process of managing something that has
& immanence: an attribute of God
that describes him as being both
within and among his creation
been entrusted to one's care. People are to
bear God's image by ruling as wise stewards
over his creation. Of course, God is the
ultimate ruler and authority in the universe
(Deuteronomy 10:14, Psalm 24:1, Romans
13:1). When God made us in his image, he invited us to participate with him in wisely
ruling over creation, bringing it to its fullness and abundance.
The second aspect (resemblance) says that we bear God's image because we resemble
him in certain attributes. One particular attribute that stands out is creativity. The novelist
Dorothy Sayers observes, "the desire and the ability to make things" is one characteristic
that is "common to God and man." For Christian apologist G. K. Chesterton, humans
are different from other creatures because we are creators as well as creatures. Of course,
we cannot create out of nothing, as God did. However, we can take the existing materials
that God has made and make new things from them. As J. R. R. Tolkien would say, we
are "sub-creators,"' taking what God has created and exercising our God-given creativity
to make culture. As author Andy Crouch points out:
Grain is good, but bread is very good. This is the essential pattern of all culture at its
best. Eggs are good, omelets are very good. Trees are good, a beautiful wooden chair is
very good. Sound is good, music is very good. When human beings do what they were
created to do, the latent possibilities in creation come to fruition, a flourishing reality
that would never exist without the application of human intelligence and intentionality.
This is what image bearing is for.20
People, then, are not mere bystanders in God's world. We have a job to do! Genesis
implies creation has a lot of potential that needs to be developed. Men and women are to
use their ruling capacity and creativity to make the world beautiful and bring out its full
potential." Therefore, every time we use our authority and creativity in a God-honoring,
constructive pursuit, we are bearing God's image well.
6. Humans: Relational and Sexed Beings
, OBJECTIVE: You will be able to describe God's plan for people as relational and
sexed beings.
A thira aspect of what it means to bear God's image focuses on our relational nature. A
we have already seen, God was not alone before creation. He was in relationship as the
Trinity-Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. God is fundamentally relational. Since humans are
made in God's image, they too are relational beings. We are made for loving relationship,
first with God, but also with ourselves and with others (Leviticus 19:18, Deuteronomy 6.5,
Matthew 22:37-39).
The Bible describes our relationship with God in various ways. To name just a few,
God is our Creator (Revelation 4:11), Parent (Psalm 103:13), Protector (Psalm 121:1-8),
Provider (Matthew 6:25-33), Savior (Luke 1:47), Friend (John 15:13), and Lord (Isaiah
42:8). Each of us has a longing in our hearts that nothing but God can satisfy. True life
does not exist outside of a relationship with God. If we are to be who God made us to be,
then we must first find our identity in relationship with God.
God created us to be his children (Isaiah 64:8). God created each person with a unique
personality and with gifts and abilities (Psalm 139:13-14, 1 Peter 4:10). Having a good
relationship with ourselves means understanding who God made us to be and seeking to
grow so that we can fulfill his purposes for us (Romans 11:29, 1 Timothy 4:7-8).
Genesis 2:18-20 makes it clear that a human being in isolation is not in a good
situation. If you've ever felt alone, without friends or family, you know how true this is.
We were not meant to be alone. God didn't
just want to be in relationship with us
himself; he wanted us to share in relationship
with others. That's why God made another
person in Genesis 2. The desires that
people have for friendship, community, and
marriage all have their source in how God
created us.
The Bible upholds the value of friendships
like that of David and Jonathan (1 Samuel
& stewardshipt the process of
managing something that has
been entrusted to one's care
18, 20) or Ruth and Naomi (Ruth 1-4). It
speaks of how friends and community can
provide support (Ecclesiastes 4:9, Proverbs
27:17) and encouragement (Hebrews 10:24-25). In Genesis, God gave the first human pair
"joint dominion" over his creation," they were to work together under God's authority. To
live well in God's world, we need to be in relationship with others.
Genesis 1:27 says that God created humans male and female. Notice that this is the
second thing that God says about humans-they are sexed beings. This means that our
sexuality is a profound gift. It reveals a deep longing for intimacy — it is meant to point us
back to God, who made us for intimacy with himself, so that we might join in the life of
love already shared in the Trinity. Sexual expression in marriage is not the ultimare goal of
CHAPTER 6
82 | CHAPTER 6


<!-- page-5 -->

Creation of
Adam and Eve,
ErlOserkirche,
Bahnhofstraße,
Weener,
Germany
84 | CHAPTER 6
life.23 Those who remain single bear God's image just as much as those who are married.
Jesus is our model. We are all "being transformed into the same image" to be like him
(2 Corinthians 3:18).
The Bible celebrates the act of sex in its proper context of a loving marriage relationship.
In order to fulfill God's creation mandate to "be fruitful and multiply" (Genesis 1:28), a
man and a woman united in marriage must join together in physical intimacy.
In Genesis 2:21-22 we see that the woman was taken out of the man. Upon
seeing the woman (Genesis 2:23), the man proclaims:
"This at last is bone of my bones
and flesh of my flesh;
she shall be called Woman,
because she was taken out of Man."
Man and woman were different from each other, but they were to
become again "one flesh" (Genesis 2:24) in a union of intimacy? This
was the first marriage. Adam and Eve were "both naked and were not
ashamed" (Genesis 2:25). Already being in relationship with God, they could
be at peace with themselves and with each other. Marriage is meant to be a loving
union on emotional, spiritual, and physical levels—a relationship characterized by "a total
self-giving, a total self-donation. 25
7. Nature: God's Gift
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to correlate the biblical mandate for stewardship
to our relationship with nature.
In the last three sections, we have explored how people were created to be in relationship
with God, themselves, and others. But there is one final relationship that often gets passed
over—the relationship between us and nature.
The way that people interact with the natural world depends on how they view
themselves in relation to nature. If we think that we are the absolute masters of nature
and that nature is merely an object for our use, then we will feel free to exploit and abuse
it any way that serves our needs. Sadly, many people throughout history have viewed the
human relationship with nature in this way. Human activity has resulted in rampant
pollution of the environment, the destruction of soil in order to satisfy the ever-increasing
demands of consumers, inhumane treatment of animals in food production, and many
other problems. Such problems have often been blamed on the Christian worldview,
which some say allows and even celebrates the exploitation of the natural world.? But
does Genesis give us permission to exploit the world for our own ends? Nothing could be
further from the truth!
Genesis 1-2 leaves no doubt that the physical world is a good place. It is a holy place, the
place where God makes himself known.2 It is a beautiful place, designed to showcase his
glory. As one scholar puts it, "We find in Genesis a world-affirming perspective.... It is a
sacred place, designed precisely as the place in which life, including human life, can flourish."?)
The world exists for God (1 Corinthians 8:6, Colossians 1-16); it is also a gift. God
put the man in the garden to work and keep it (Genesis 2:15). The Hebrew word for work
(had also means to serve. The word for keep (šamar means to watch or to preserve R
words imply bringing something to maturity. That God gives humans dominion over
creation and tells them to subdue it (Genesis 1:28) in no way implies that they can simply
do whatever they like with it.
We are stewards in God's world. We do not have the right to tarnish and destroy his
property but are charged with protecting it, preserving it, and working for is fourishing.
This is the biblical mandate for stewards all throughout Scripture. God expects his people
to wisely care for land, plants, trees, domesticated and wild animals, birds, fish, and even
creeping things (Genesis 1:20; Leviticus 25: 1-12; Deuteronomy 22:6, 25:4; Isaiah 35:8-10).
Like animals and plants, people are a natural part of creation. But God also gave us an
exalted place here (Genesis 1:20-30; Psalm 8:4-6); our stewardship involves caring about
humans too. Sometimes, this means that we will need to alter landscapes or cut down
trees in order to plant food or build housing. If we do this wisely and carefully, we will not
tarnish God's world. Rather, we will be doing our job in bringing abundance out of the
earth.
God's creation must be approached with love and respect. God created the world out of
love and we are "to give the world back to God in works of love."3 Our attitude should be
one of faithfulness, gratefulness, and humility, remembering that creation is God's gift.?"
We can care for creation, while also upholding the dignity of people by creating cultures
where we can flourish.
8. Genesis Confronts Ancient Creation Myths
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to distinguish between the false ideas in creation
myths and the truth of the Genesis creation story.
This brings us back to where we started at the beginning of this chapter. Did the writer
of Genesis merely borrow from other creation myths in the ancient world? Is Genesis
1-2 in any way unique? Though there are
similarities between the Genesis creation
story and other ancient creation myths, the
differences between them are far greater. In
fact, Genesis 1-2 is actually a refutation of
other creation myths popular in the ancient
Near East. Consider these distinctive
elements in the biblical story:
• There is only one God, not many. In
ancient creation myths, the sun, moon,
and stars were often seen as gods. In
Genesis, they are God's creation.
• The universe has a divine origin.
The gods of ancient creation stories are
CHAPTER 6
| 85


<!-- page-6 -->

Adam naming
animals mural,
Agios Nikolaos
Anapafsas
Monastery,
Meteora, Greece
presented as part of a universe that has always existed. They shape or elicit creation
from preexisting matter. In Genesis, creation has a beginning. God creates the world
out of nothing (ex nihilo)32
• God is sovereign. While many creation myths begin with a violent power struggle
among the gods, in Genesis God has no challenger. He is the absolute Sovereign over
• Creation is purposeful. In some creation myths, the creation is a byproduct or
accident of the gods' struggle. In Genesis, God deliberately and purposefully speaks
creation into existence.
• Creation is not the result of a sexual act. The pagan gods of ancient myths are
often embodied, gendered, and sexually active, and their activity results in creation.
In Genesis, God has no spouse and is not sexually active.
• God is good and loving. Often, the gods of the ancient world are portrayed as
perverse, immoral, petty, jealous of humans, and power hungry. The God of the
Bible, by contrast, is good, loving, and just.
• Humans are valued in God's creation. In many ancient myths, humans are
created as slaves because the gods are lazy and want other people to do their work. In
Genesis, humans are specially made in God's image to participate in God's wise rule
of creation. 33
Genesis 1-2 is a direct challenge to ancient pagan ways of thinking about the world
and humans' place within it. Before we move on, let's take the last example (Humans are
valued in God's creation) and zero in on it to see how Genesis confronts and undermines
the low view of humanity put forth by other ancient myths.
In ancient Egyptian culture, the pharaoh was unique among humans. He alone was
considered to be the image of God. This was a common view in the ancient world—only
special classes of people (such
as kings were considered
to be God's image. Since
the majority of humans
in the ancient world were
considered slaves of the gods,
kings could take human life
by their command. (Think
of how Pharaoh commanded
the Israelites to throw their
male babies into the river
in Exodus 1:16, 22.) As the sole image-bearer of God, Pharaoh dominated the Israelites,
abusing and enslaving them.
Now, imagine being an Israelite in that culture and hearing the Genesis story. This
Israelite would understand that Pharaoh was not, in fact, the sole bearer of the divine
image; rather, every human being—each man and each woman—bears God's image!
This Genesis idea undermined Pharaoh's godlike authority. It implied that everyone had
equal value because all were made in God's image. In this view, all humans have inheren
dignity and should be treated with respect. Later in Genesis, God warns against murder
on the grounds that people are made in God's image (Genesis 9:6). To abuse or assault
another human being is an attack on God.
9. Genesis Confronts Alternative Worldviews
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to determine seven ways the biblical creation
story is distinct from other worldviews.
The Genesis account of creation confronts and undermines ancient pagan worldviews, but
does it have anything to say to our modern society? Yes! In contrast to other worldviews,
the Genesis creation story...
• affirms the direct involvement of a personal God in creation. Unlike atheism,
which says that God does not exist, the
biblical account affirms that God does
exist and that he is a personal and loving
Creator.
• affirms the distinction between creation
and the Creator. This directly contradicts
pantheism, which claims that the universe
is god.
• affirms that the universe is good and
purposeful. This confronts gnosticism (the
idea that the material world is evil), and
nihilism (the idea that there is no meaning
or purpose in the universe).
• affirms the special creation of humans.
This counters any evolutionary theory that proposes that life arose by random
accident and that human beings are merely highly evolved animals.
• affirms the goodness of the body and sexuality. Genesis rejects any notion that our
bodies are inherently evil or that our sex is something we can alter however we like.
Rather, our bodies and our sex are God's good gifts.
• affirms the distinction and equality between male and female. This confronts the
modern notion that men and women are interchangeable. At the same time, it rejects
any notion that men are superior to women or women superior to men.
• affirms the dignity and value of all human beings. This undermines any view
that devalues people based on age, gender, sex, race, class, national or ethnic origin,
physical or intellectual abilities or characteristics, or circumstances of conception.
The above distinctives have major implications for how we live. Le's consider two of
them in more detail to get an idea of how radical the biblical worldview is.
First, ask yourself some questions: What gives you value? Are you inherently valuable,
or must you do something to become valuable? Are you valuable because of what you can
CHAPTER 6 |
86 | CHAPTER 6


<!-- page-7 -->

88 | CHAPTER 6
accomplish? How much you possess? How fit your body is? The color of your skin? Your
mental capacity? Without God to give us value, secular worldviews provide no foundation
for human dignity. Without God, our value must inevitably be assigned by flawed human
beings based on some arbitrary criteria. In contrast, the biblical teaching is that because
you are made in God's image, you are inherently valuable and endowed with dignity from
God. It does not matter how attractive you are, your age, mental capacity, size, body type,
or skin color. Each and every human being matters to God because everyone bears his
image. Each and every human being has dignity and value because God says so. Think
about how seeing people this way could help with some problematic issues in our society
like racism, sexism, abortion, and euthanasia.
Second, consider how much
Genesis upholds the value of
the body and sexuality. It has
Each and every
human being
matters to
God because
everyone bears
his image.
often been said that Christianity
represses sexuality and sees it as
evil. But the Christian worldview
(beginning in Genesis) upholds the
value of the body and the inherent
goodness of sexuality. Jesus became
a human, with a physical body.
The Bible includes the Song of
Solomon, celebrating sex and
romantic love. Let it be said clearly:
The Bible teaches that the body
and sexuality are profoundly good. "God saw everything that he had made, and behold,
it was very good" (Genesis 1:31). In contrast, modern secular views reduce people to
sexual beings who may treat their bodies as raw material to use and be used by others in
the pursuit of pleasure.
10. Conclusion
Genesis 1-2, the beginning of the biblical metanarrative, reveals a good and loving
Creator, who made the world in an orderly fashion. He has unlimited power and
authority, but he does not use them to manipulate or abuse others. Rather, God channels
his power and creativity to make a beautiful world, and he chooses to share some of
his authority with us. He is both separate from his creation and actively involved in it.
Creation is primarily an act of God's overflowing love.
The first chapters of Genesis portray a creation that is good and beautiful—a sacred
place where God is revealed and known. The world is not inherently evil. It is not to
be discarded, abused, or treated irreverently. It is not God, but since God loves it, we
should, too.
The creation story unveils humans as God's image bearers-stewards and caretakers
of all their surroundings. They are endowed with dignity and worth right from the
beginning. Both male and female bear God's image and have equal worth. They are
relational beings. They are made to be in relationship with God (being under his authority
and participating in his mission), with chemselves (bearing God's image through creativity
and action in the world, with others (in family, friendship, and community), and with
nature (ruling wisely as stewards rather than exploiting the world for their own ends.
The Bible's creation story also confronts the negative and dehumanizing tendencies of
many worldviews, both ancient and modern. It provides a way forward for living well in
God's world. Creation is God's first act in the great drama that spans the Bible into our
modern day and beyond. We must begin at the beginning of the biblical metanarrative-
Genesis 1 and 2—with careful study and reflection on God's Word, so that we may learn
how to live purpose-filled lives in the world.
This was the situation at the beginning of our story: God created human beings to
be in loving relationship with him and to participate in his rule by stewarding the world
for God's glory. All was well. But something went wrong in God's world, something that
plunged our world into evil and destruction. That's what the next chapter is all about.
ENDNOTES
'John D. Currid, Ancient Egypt and the Old Testament (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Books, 1997), 36-40.
2"Ta'aroa," Encyclopedia.com, https://www.encyclopedia.com/humanities/news-wires-white-papers-and-
books/taaroa.
3John H. Walton, Ancient Near Eastern Thought and the Old Testament: Introducing the Conceptual World of
the Hebrew Bible (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Books, 2006), 46.
*John D. Currid, Against the Gods: The Polemical Theology of the Old Testament (Wheaton, IL: Crossway,
2013), 33-35.
'Currid, Against the Gods, 37-38.
•Currid, Against the Gods, 104-105.
"See Significant Numbers in "Number" entry of the International Standard Bible Encyclopedia, htps://www.
internationalstandardbible.com/N/number.html.
Blain Provan, Seriously Dangerous Religion: What the Old Testament Really Says and Why It Matters (Waco,
TX: Baylor University Press, 2014), 87.
•Provan, Seriously Dangerous Religion, 90-91.
1°Craig G. Bartholomew and Michael W. Goheen, The Drama of Scripture: Finding Our Place in the Biblical
Story (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2004), 39.
'The philosopher was Nikolai Berdyaev. As quoted in Dorothy Sayers, The Mind of the Maker (San Francisco:
HarperCollins, 1987), 29.
1Gerard Manley Hopkins, "God's Grandeur," https://poets.org/poem/gods-grandeur.
13 Michael Reeves, Delighting in the Trinity: An Introduction to the Christian Faich (Downers Grove, IL: VP
Academic, 2012), 24.
"Craig Gay, Modern Technology and the Human Future: A Christian Appraisa (Downers Grove, IL: IVP
Academic, 2018), 137.
1SAngus Ritchie and Nick Spencer, The Case for Christian Humanism: Why Christians Should Believe in
Humanism, and Humanists in Christianity (London: Theos, 2014), 51-52, https//www.cheoshinkrank.
co.uk/research/2014/12/05/the-case-for-christian-humanism.
I°D. J. A. Clines, "The Image of God in Man," Tyndale Bulletin 19 (1968), 53-103, htrps//ia02704.
us.archive.org/2/items/pdfy-SLVx2c60Fa59 pgF)/The%201mage%200f%20God%201n%20Man.pdf.
Sayers, The Mind of the Maker, 22.
1°G. K. Chesterton, The Everlasting Man (London: Hodder & Stoughton, 1925), 24.
CHAPTER 6 | 89


<!-- page-8 (book p.91) -->

19J. R. R. Tolkien, "On Fairy Stories," in Tales from the Perilous Realm (London: HarperCollins Publishers,
2008), 315-400.
2°Andy Crouch, Playing God: Redeeming the Gift of Power (Downers Grove, IL, IVP Books, 2013), 105-106.
"Gay, Modern Technology, 144.
22Provan, Seriously Dangerous Religion, 92.
"Julie Slattery, "What's the Purpose of Your Sexuality, Really?," https://www.authenticintimacy.com/
resources/16353/whats-the-purpose-of-your-sexuality-really.
24Provan, Seriously Dangerous Religion, 89.
2' Christopher West, Theology of the Body Explained: A Commentary on John Paul II's Man and Woman He
Created Them (Boston: Pauline Books & Media, 2007), 29.
Lynn White, "The Historical Roots of our Ecologic Crisis," in I. G. Barbour ed., Western Man and
Environmental Ethics (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1973), 24.
27See, for example, Lynn White, "Ecologic Crisis," 25-27.
28 Provan, Seriously Dangerous Religion, 32.
2°Provan, Seriously Dangerous Religion, 46.
30 Gay, Modern Technology, 146.
3 Wendell Berry, "The Gift of Good Land," in The Art of the Commonplace: The Agrarian Essays of Wendell
Berry, ed. Norman Wirzba (Berkley, CA: Counterpoint, 2002), 297.
32Many theologians argue that this is one of the distinguishing marks of the Christian narrative. For
example, see lan A. McFarland, From Nothing: A Theology of Creation (Louisville, KY: Westminster John
Knox Press, 2014), xii-xiii.
33See Kenneth J. Turner,
"Teaching Genesis 1 at a Christian College, in Reading Genesis 1-2: An Evangelical
Conversation, ed. J. Daryl Charles (Peabody, MA: Hendrickson, 2013), chap 6.
Act 2: The Fall
1. All Was Well
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to compare the harmony of the original creation
with the state of the world today.
In the last chapter, we left the biblical story at the end of Genesis 2. The powerful, wise, and
Loving God made a rich and abundant universe, filled with his glory. Human beings were
specially created in God's image and given the job of stewarding this world. At that time
there was no sin or exploitation of the natural world, no abuse in human relationships, and
no shame, evil, or suffering. All was well; this was God's original intention for the world.
90 CHAPTER 6
