# Chapter 7

<!-- page-1 (book p.91) -->

191. R. R. Tolkien, "On Fairy Stories," in Tales from the Perilous Realm (London: HarperCollins Publishers,
2008), 315-400.
2 Andy Crouch, Playing God: Redeeming the Gift of Power (Downers Grove, IL, VP Books, 2013), 105-106.
"'Gay, Modern Technology, 144.
22Provan, Seriously Dangerous Religion, 92.
2 Julie Slattery, "What's the Purpose of Your Sexuality, Really?," https://www.authenticintimacy.com/
resources/16353/whats-the-purpose-of-your-sexuality-really.
24Provan, Seriously Dangerous Religion, 89.
2' Christopher West, Theology of the Body Explained: A Commentary on John Paul IT's Man and Woman He
Created Them (Boston: Pauline Books & Media, 2007), 29.
26Lynn White, "The Historical Roots of our Ecologic Crisis," in I. G. Barbour ed., Western Man and
Environmental Ethics (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1973), 24.
27See, for example, Lynn White, "Ecologic Crisis," 25-27.
28 Provan, Seriously Dangerous Religion, 32.
Provan, Seriously Dangerous Religion, 46.
3°Gay, Modern Technology, 146.
3'Wendell Berry, "The Gift of Good Land," in The Art of the Commonplace: The Agrarian Essays of Wendell
Berry, ed. Norman Wirzba (Berkley, CA: Counterpoint, 2002), 297.
32Many theologians argue that this is one of the distinguishing marks of the Christian narrative. For
example, see lan A. McFarland, From Nothing: A Theology of Creation (Louisville, KY: Westminster John
Knox Press, 2014), xii-xiii.
33 See Kenneth J. Turner, "Teaching Genesis 1 at a Christian College," in Reading Genesis 1-2: An Evangelical
Conversation, ed. J. Daryl Charles (Peabody, MA: Hendrickson, 2013), chap 6.
Act 2: The Fall
1. All Was Well
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to compare the harmony of the original creation
with the state of the world today.
In the last chapter, we left the biblical story at the end of Genesis 2. The powerful, wise, and
Loving God made a rich and abundant universe, filled with his glory. Human beings were
specially created in God's image and given the job of stewarding this world. At that time
there was no sin or exploitation of the natural world. no abuse in human relationships, and
no shame, evil, or suffering. All was well; this was God's original intention for the world.
90 | CHAPTER 6


<!-- page-2 -->

The Hebrew word shalom (salôm) means peace, harmony, wholeness, prosperity, welfare, and
tranquility. A state of shalom is a state where everything is good and in order.
The original shalom of creation can be seen in each of the four relationships we
discussed in the previous chapter. The world God made was a place where he could dwell
in close relationship with his creation. Adam and Eve knew God personally; he had given
them life and sustained them. Adam and Eve were also properly ordered within themselves
and ready to fulfill their calling. The first
human pair were in right relationship with each
other. Deriving their value from God, the man
& shalom:
means peace,
harmony,
wholeness,
prosperity,
welfare, and
tranquility
and the woman could live in harmony, unity,
and intimacy. Finally, humans were in right
relationship with creation and acting as stewards
to bring forth abundance and beauty from the
earth.
If you take a look around at our world
today, you'll quickly realize that we aren't in a
Peace: & Hope
shalom situation. Something has gone wrong
with the original creation. All of us know that
we aren't living in Eden anymore. The Bible's
metanarrative continues in Genesis 3 and unfolds in a world corrupted by evil, broken by
sin, and plagued by suffering.
Nearly every worldview recognizes there is some kind of problem in our world, but
there is wide disagreement over what the problem is. Some worldviews accept evil and
suffering as a natural part of life, while others teach that evil and suffering are illusions.
Some suggest the problem is humanity itself, while others argue that individual human
beings are good, but human systems and societies are corrupt.
The Christian worldview also has an answer for what is wrong with the world—a
reasonable and compelling answer. To put it bluntly, the Bible teaches that the problem
with our world is sin. Sin is the reason for evil and suffering in the world. But sin, evil, and
suffering played no part in God's creation; they are intruders in God's world. This is not
the way the world was supposed to be.
What is sin? Where did it come from? In this chapter, we'll explore what the Bible says
about these questions. We'll also look at the consequences of sin and what God has been
doing about sin since it first entered the world.
2. What Is Sin?
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to explain the three words used in the Bible for sin.
Before we look at how sin entered the world, we need to be clear about what sin is. For
many people, the word sin conjures up images of an angry God who likes to spoil all of
our fun. But sin doesn't mean failing to follow a list of petty rules; it is far more serious.
In this section, we'll take a look at three words used in the Bible for sin-sin, transgression,
and iniquity-to get a better idea of what sin actually is.!
in. The most common word used in the Bible for sin is, well, sin (Hebrew hattäat, Greek
definition is well-known, but it only makes
samartia). To sin is to miss the goal, to fail to love God and others. The first part of thi
sense if we know what the goal is. In the last
chapter, we saw that God's goal was for us
o be in right relationship with himself and
others. Therefore, to sin is also to fail to love
God and others.?
o sin:
to miss the goal,
to fail to love God
and others
We see many instances of sin in the Old
Testament. When Cain got angry, God
warned him that sin was "crouching at the
door" (Genesis 4:7), waiting to control him. It
eventually did when Cain murdered his brother,
Abel (Genesis 4:8). When the prophet Nathan
confronted King David for his adultery and
murder, David acknowledged that he had sinned (2 Samuel 12:7-14, Psalm 51:4). David
sinned against Bathsheba, against her husband Uriah the Hittite, and against God.
In the New Testament, Paul speaks of how both Jews and Gentiles are guilty of sin
(Romans 3:9) and how we must not let sin "reign" in our lives (Romans 6:12). John makes
it clear that when we fail to love others, we also fail to love God (1 John 4:20). Through
sin, all of humanity has fallen short of God's goal of love. (Romans 3:23)
Transgression. A less familiar Bible word for sin is transgression (Hebrew peša', Greek
paraptoma). Transgression is the act of rebelling or breaking trust with another person.
Imagine telling a friend a sensitive secret.
If that friend maliciously shares that
& transgression:
the act of
rebelling or
breaking trust
with another
person
secret with other people, your friend has
transgressed against you.
he
he
In Genesis 37, Joseph's brothers
had a responsibility to protect him.
Instead, they betrayed him and sold him
into slavery. Later in Genesis 50, they
asked Joseph to forgive them for their
transgression. In the New Testament,
Jesus admonished his disciples to forgive
others who had transgressed against them
so that they could be forgiven by God.
(Matthew 6:15, 18:35; Mark 11:25-26). The book of James challenges us to confess our
transgressions to each other so we may be healed (James 5:16).
CHAPTER 7 | 93
92 | CHAPTER 7
S Act 2: The Fall


<!-- page-3 -->

Iniquity. The word iniquity (Hebrew aôn, Greek anomia) refers to crooked, wicked, and
perverse behavior.
In the book of 1 Samuel, God told Samuel
he would punish the house of Eli for their
iniquity. Eli's sons were supposed to serve
& iniquity: crooked,
wicked, and
perverse behavior
God faithfully in the tabernacle. Instead,
they abused the sacrificial system and had sex
with the women who were helping with the
sacrifices. Their behavior was totally wicked
(1 Samuel 2:12-35). In the New Testament,
Jesus appropriately condemned the Pharisees
for appearing to be righteous on the outside
while being full of hypocrisy and iniquity on
the inside (Matthew 23:28).
So, sin in the Bible isn't just not living up
to God's standard despite your best efforts. It involves a failure to love God and neighbor,
the violation of trust through breaking of relationships, and wicked behavior. Sin, in all its
forms, corrupts and pollutes our world. But where did sin come from in the first place?
3. The Beginning of Sin
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to describe what the fall is and how it happened.
The story of how everything went wrong in God's world is what theologians call the fall.
The fall is the belief that sin entered the world when Adam and Eve chose to disobey God. The
fall is the second act in the Bible's metanarrative.
Genesis 3:1 introduces a new character, the serpent: "Now the serpent was more crafty
than any other beast of the field that the Lord God had made." Genesis does not explain
what the serpent was doing in the garden or who the serpent was, but other verses of
Scripture seem to identify the serpent as Satan (see Romans 16:20; Revelation 12:9, 20:2).
The serpent is clearly more than just a simple reptile. He is intelligent, speaks, asks clever
questions, and is antagonistic toward both God and humans.
When the serpent encountered the woman in the garden, the first thing he did was
challenge God's command. "Did God actually say, 'You shall not eat of any tree in the
garden?" (Genesis 3:1). Of course, we, the readers, know that God told Adam he could
eat freely from any tree in the garden except one: the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil
(Genesis 2:16-17).
The woman's response to the serpent is fascinating. She corrected the serpent saying,
"We may eat of the fruit of the trees in the garden, but God said, 'You shall not eat of
the fruit of the tree that is in the midst of the garden...
'» Then she added, "'neither
shall you touch it, lest you die'» (Genesis 3:2-3). The Bible does not report that God had
said anything about touching the tree; it only reports that he told the man not to eat of it
(Genesis 2:16-17).
Upon hearing the woman's response, the serpent went from challeneing God's word..
outright rejection of it: "You will not surely die" (Genesis 3:4). The serpent suggested than
God lied. Then he questioned God's goodness and motivation, saying "For God knows
that when you eat of it your eyes will be opened, and you will be like God, knowing
good and evil" (v. 5). The serpent's promise is ironic, considering that human beings were
already like God: we bear his image. In Genesis 1-2, God gave freedom and blessing, but
the serpent suggested that God is actually stingy and restrictive? The serpent wanted to
convince Adam and Eve that God had been holding out on them. He wanted to break the
trust between the Creator and humanity.*
What was it the serpent suggested God was holding back? It seems the wisdom offered
by the Tree was a wisdom that makes one independent from God! The woman saw
the desirability of this independence and seized it, as did her husband (v. 6). They
demonstrated that they were not content with
the knowledge that God had given them. They
were not content to bear God's image; instead,
they wanted to be gods, ruling on their own
terms. They wanted to define good and evil for
themselves. They wanted to make the rules in
God's world.
This was the first sin. The fall was not
primarily about eating a piece of fruit. Adam
and Eve sinned by failing to love God. They
transgressed by rebelling against him. They
o the fall: the belief that sin
entered the world when Adam
and Eve chose to disobey God
chose iniquity by rejecting their role as
stewards.
4. Consequences of Sin: Broken Relationships
with God and Nature
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to identify the physical and spiritual
consequences of the fall in people's relationship with God and nature.
The first consequence of Adam and Eve's sin was death. In a Christian view of the world,
death is unnatural. According to Paul in 1 Corinthians, death is the great enemy (1
Corinthians 15:26), an invader in God's world. Christians have the hope of eternal life
in God's kingdom, but this hope should never cause us to minimize death in the present.
When Jesus went to raise Lazarus from the dead, Jesus wept with those who mourned
for Lazarus (John 11:33-35). Jesus took the time to feel the weight and tragedy of death.
Because of sin, it is only a matter of time until our bodies tragically decay and die. Job
puts it strikingly, "Man wastes away like a rotten thing, like a garment that is moth-eaten"
(Job 13:28).
Adam and Eve would die physically (because they could no longer eat from the Tree of
Life. bur also spiritually because to be away from God's presence leads to eternal death.
CHAPTER 7 | 95
94 | CHAPTER 7


<!-- page-4 -->

True life, they discovered, was not found in being "like God" in the serpen's sense,
but in being "with God." Their spiritual death was the fracturing and distortion of
their relationship with God.® In rebelling against him, the man and woman mistrusted,
ignored, and rejected God. Their shame caused them to hide from God (Genesis 3:8-10).
When God asked Adam if he had eaten from the Tree
of Knowledge of Good and Evil, Adam blamed "the
woman whom you gave to be with me" (v. 12). Adam
blamed Eve; he also blamed God for making her in the
first place. The trust between God and humans was
broken.
Today, both the physical and spiritual consequences
of the fall are felt by all humanity. We all experience
pain, suffering, and eventual death. The spiritual
consequences of humanity's broken relationship with
God are evident in our attitudes. We no longer trust
God. Instead, some ignore him. Others fear him as
an angry judge or see him as uninterested and distant.
Many atheists say that to enjoy life, we must abandon God. Others dislike the idea of God
having authority and so reject him entirely.
The fall also had physical consequences for nature and for our relationship with
creation. Plants decay, forests burn, rivers dry up, and animal predators tear their victims
to pieces. As one famous hymn puts it, "Change and decay in all around I see." The book
of Romans says that "creation waits with eager longing;" it groans because it has been
"subjected to futility," and it is under "bondage to corruption" (Romans 8:19-22).
In Genesis 3:17-19, God cursed the ground so it would not yield fruit easily. In Genesis
1-2, Adam and Eve's responsibility to cultivate the earth represents "all kinds of human
labor and culture making,
," so when the ground was cursed, all work fell under the curse.
Work would be frustrating.° We see dimensions of this today in work that is tedious,
boring, painful, dehumanizing, and often characterized by the frantic struggle to get
ahead or stay afloat. The pressures, demands, and problems with work over time cause us
to stop seeing ourselves as stewards of creation, but as its masters and even foes—abusing,
exploiting, and destroying creation for our own gain. Creation longs to be free from the
curse and to be reconciled with the humans who were meant to care for it.
5. Consequences of Sin: Broken Relationships
with Self and Others
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to infer the consequences of the fall in people's
relationships with themselves and with other people.
The fall also has consequences for our relationship with ourselves. When Adam and
Eve ate from the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, they became internally broken.
Suddenly, they realized that they were naked and were ashamed (Genesis 3:7). While
physically nothing had changed (they were naked in Genesis 1-2 as well, Adam and Eve
were no longer comfortable in their own skin. They sewed fig leaves together to cove
themselves up. Later, God made them clothes to cover their nakednes (. 21).
Internal brokenness causes us to see ourselves in the wrong way, to justify our sinful
actions, and to deceive ourselves into calling good evil and evil good. When we live
contrary to the way God designed us, we become plagued by guilt, fear, shame, and
anxiety. No longer content with our identity as beings in God's image, or with the gifts
and tasks he has given us, we seck to define ourselves through who or how much we know.
how much we can possess, or what we can accomplish. Such things can never fully satisfy
us (Ecclesiastes 1:12-2:26).
The internal fracturing of humans leads to a more obvious fracturing of the
relationships we have with other people. The first signal of this in the text is that Adam
and Eve no longer felt safe with one another. What had previously been a relationship of
intimacy was now marred by shame and confusion. The second signal is that when God
questioned Adam, he refused to take responsibility for his own sin. Instead, Adam blamed
Eve. Can you imagine the frustration, pain, and tension this caused in Adam and Eve's
relationship?
Genesis 3:16 states that the woman would experience pain in childbearing and her
"desire shall be contrary to [or shall be toward her] husband, and he shall rule over [her)."
The meaning of this part of the verse is not easy to decipher. It could mean that the
woman's desire will be to dominate her husband or that she will turn away from God's
rule to her husband's rule." For the man to "rule" over
the woman might mean that he will treat her "as if she
were part of the creation over which humans are given
dominion, rather than being herself a coruler over
creation." 12 However this verse is interpreted, it is clear
that what it describes is not a good thing. What had
previously been a relationship of complete oneness and
trust would be characterized by division and distrust.
The fallout from this broken relationship is tragic,
but the fall affects all relationships, not just those
between men and women—it affects friendships,
parent/child relationships, sibling relationships,
and boss/coworker relationships. Throughout the Bible, we see betrayal, sibling rivalry,
selfishness, dishonesty, abuse, and injustice all perpetuated by people seeking to get the
upper hand over others.
Today, the consequences of broken relationships are no less severe. Consider, for
example, physical and emotional abuse, child labor, exploitation, sex slavery, gossip,
lying, stealing, murder, hatred, harassment, discrimination, abortion, and eurhanasia.
All of these examples illustrate instances in which people (who all bear God's image) are
mistreated in some way. Sin has caused a enormous mess in human relationsnips.
CHAPTER 7 | 97
96 | CHAPTER7
9 Act 2: The Fall


<!-- page-5 -->

98 | CHAPTER 7
6. Who Is to Blame?
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to discuss the doctrine of original sin and whether
God is to blame for people's sin.
As we look at the sin that has caused such a mess in our world, it is our natural tendency to
look for someone to blame. Many people believe that we don't really have any natural bent
toward evil; ' therefore it is our society,
culture, or upbringing that is to blame
o doctrine of original sin: the belief that
Adam and Eve's first sin corrupted the
nature of their descendants
for our problems. Going one step further,
some secularists argue that our guilt and
shame over sin are unnecessary; they are
psychological trauma foisted on us by the
tyrannical God of Christian faith. As the
late atheist Christopher Hitchens argued,
"Once you assume a creator and a plan,
it makes us objects in a cruel experiment
whereby we are created sick and
commanded to be well" 4 Hitchens said
religion itself is largely to blame for evil.
Many others, like Hitchens, see the God of
the Bible as a selfish, cruel deity who curses people forever because of eating a simple piece
of fruit.
Christians would say that these views do not accurately describe the Bible's teaching on
sin and evil. The first sin was not merely about snatching a piece of fruit. The Scriptures
also affirm that God is not the author, creator, or instigator of evil (see Genesis 1:31, 1
Corinthians 14:33, James 1:13, 1 John 1:5). Rather, Genesis 3 shows evil is the result of
rebellion against God.
Though Scripture teaches that people were not created evil, sin entered the world, and
as a result, sin has infected all of us. "Just as sin came into the world through one man,
and death through sin, so death spread to all ... because all sinned" (Romans 5:12). In
this verse, Paul is referring to the fall of Adam and Eve in Genesis 3. Though both sinned,
Paul uses Adam (the one man) as the representative of their sin. Because of the first sin
in the garden of Eden, now all of us inherit a sin nature. This is what theologians call the
doctrine of original sin. The doctrine of original sin is the belief that Adam and Eve's first sin
corrupted the nature of their descendants.
This doctrine teaches that we are so thoroughly fallen that nothing remains unaffected
by our fallenness. It also says that we are so absolutely fallen that there's nothing we can do
to fix ourselves. The fall affects us so deeply-both physically and psychologically-that
our attempts at self-repair only highlight how broken our condition really is. The doctrine
of original sin isn't just about imperfect human beings who make mistakes; it is about
rebels going against their Creator, incapable of doing what is good on their own.
The Bible is clear that no one is exempt. We are all sinners (Romans 3:9-26), our
hearts are deceitful (Jeremiah 17:9), and we have all "turned aside" and "become corrupt"
(Psalm 14:1-3). Christian writer and apologist G. K. Chesterton understood this truth
well. Responding to the say Paw hat's wrong with the world! he supposedly replied
simply: "I am." 15
The Scriptures are clear that sin is an outsider in our world that invades and corrupts
everything It IS like a parasite that latches on to a living host and sucks away life and
metin. but sin am be blamed solely on society, l s be
lies deep within each of us, and on our own there is noching we can do to fix it.
7. God's Grace in the Midst of Judgment
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to summarize how God responded to Adam and
Eve's sin and showed grace to them by promising redemption.
Admittedly this chapter hasn't been very encouraging so far. We've talked about sin, how it
entered the world, its terrible consequences, and how each one of us is part of the problem.
Is there any hope? How does God's great story continue? The good news is that God didn't
exit the world after the fall. He stayed involved and worked to redeem his people.
Redemption begins in Genesis 3. Wait, isn't that the chapter where everything went
wrong? The one where God dealt out judgment? Yes, but if you look closely, you will
see that even in the midst of judgment, God was gracious. The first thing we see is that
God did not give up on Adam and Eve. After they had eaten the fruit from the Tree of
Knowledge of Good and Evil, God called out to them, "Where are you?" (Genesis 3:9).
Now why would God need to ask this question? Didn't he know where they were? Of
course he did! When he called out to them, he was
offering them the chance to confess and be honest
about what they had done. God could just as easily
have struck them down-hadn't he warned them
that when they ate from the Tree they would die?
Instead, God graciously reached out to them. He
refused to abandon them.
The most important act of grace is stated in
Genesis 3:14-15. In these verses, God condemned
the serpent for the evil he had done. The serpent
Was cursed "above all beasts of the field" and
would eat dust all its life. But there's more.
God said there would be a conflict between the serpent and the offspring of the woman,
who would "bruise [the serpents) head," though the serpent would "bruise his hee. "
This cryptic promise is what theologians call the protoevangelium. It is the first (proto-)
announcement of the gospel (the evangel, or good news). God's promise in Genesis 3:15
is the first appearance of his plan to restore and redeem humanity through Jesus death
and resurrection. The serpent would bite the heel of the woman's offspring, but the serpent
would be crushed. This looks ahead to Jesus, who in his death on the cross is mortally
wounded by Satan, but ultimately crushes Satan by rising from the dead. Jesus victory on
the cross is the blow that defeats death and sin once and for all.
CHAPTER 7 | 99


<!-- page-6 -->

Cain and Abel
offer sacrifices,
by George
Wesley Evans,
receptive
Illustrations of
the Bible, 1750
100 | CHAPTER 7
The final act of grace in this chapter may seem like one more curse, but God did not
curse humans. He cursed the ground and the serpent. Yet God sent Adam and Eve out
of the garden so they would not "take also of the tree of life and eat, and live forever"
(Genesis 3:22). How is this grace? Apparently, if humans had continued to eat from the
Tree of Life, they would have lived forever-
-but this would not be a pleasant existence.
Death limits the suffering that humans will experience in a fallen world.
8. The Way of Cain and the Flood
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to give examples of sin in the lives of Adam and
Eve's descendants.
After these events, Eve gave birth to a son and named him Cain. Would this be the
promised Offspring who would crush the head of the serpent? One
can imagine that Adam and Eve's hopes were high. In Genesis 4:1,
Eve says that she has "gotten a man with the help of the LoRD." The
Hebrew of this verse is tricky, and scholars are divided on how it
should be interpreted. Some scholars take this statement to mean that
Eve gave birth to Cain with God's help.l Others see Eve's statement
as an arrogant assertion of her own godlikeness, suggesting that, like
God, she too can create life.!
The trouble began when Cain and his brother Abel brought
sacrifices to the Lord. Abel brought a lamb from his flock and Cain
brought "fruit of the ground" (v. 3). God accepted Abel's sacrifice
but rejected Cain's. Hebrews 11:4 says that Abel's offering was given
through faith, implying that Cain's was not. According to Hebrews
11:6, "And without faith it is impossible to please him, for whoever
would draw near to God must believe that he exists and that he
rewards those who seek him." Rather than having faith, it seems that Cain's attitude was
arrogant and rebellious. In Genesis 4:6-7, God made it clear to Cain that if he did what
was right, he would be accepted. But, if he did not, he should watch out, because sin was
waiting to overcome him. God portrays sin as a wild animal waiting to pounce on Cain
and devour him.
Cain allowed sin to get the better of him and ended up murdering his brother Abel.
God gave Cain a chance to confess his crime, but Cain refused to own up to it. So, God
punished Cain by banishing him. Yet God also offered grace. He placed a mark on Cain.
so that no one could take revenge on him. Cain's descendants went on to form cultures
and civilizations—building cities, playing music, and forging tools (all examples of
people using their God-given talents potentially for good). However, human wickedness
continued. In Genesis 4:23-24, Lamech boasted about how he had just killed a young
man merely for hurting him. This wicked man is also the first man in the Bible to have
more than one wife.
Meanwhile, Eve was granted another son, Seth, who also had descendants. "At that
time," Genesis 4:26 says, "people began to call on the name of the LoRD." To call on the
name of the LORD Is to de bille him as od and to worship him. From this momen
on, human beings followed prote of two paths. Some humbly acknowledged God as Creato
and worshipped him. thersom pue red the way of Cain" (Jude lill), rebelling against God
by perpetuating evil. Unpu notabre example of a person who called on the name of the Lor
was Enoch. The bible has only a few verses to describe him, but we know he walked wit
God" (Genesis 5:21-24), hacy) "pog and pleased God (Hebrews Il.)). For this, he was taken
up into heaven without dying.
By Genesis 6, it becomes clear that most humans chose the way of Cain. In fact, people
became so corrupt that their "every intention.... was only evil" (Genesis 65), and God
decided the world needed a fresh start. Human beings had completely failed as God's
stewards, instead filling the world with sin. So, God instructed a righteous man named
Noah to build an ark to escape the flood with which God would destroy the earth. This
was a radical act of faith on Noah's part (Hebrews 47). Noah and his family, along wich
animals and birds of every kind were saved from the flood inside the ark. The flood
covered the earth for 150 days and destroyed almost every living thing.
9. God's Covenant with Noah and the Tower of
Babel
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to articulate what a covenant is, how God made a
covenant with Noah, and what happened to humans after the tower of Babel.
After the flood, God made a covenant with Noah, his family, and "every living creature"
(Genesis 9:9-10). Because there are several
key moments in the Bible where God makes
a covenant with someone, we need to stop
and consider this concept. A covenant is an
agreement between two parties that involves both
rights and responsibilities.
A covenant is different from a contract. In a
• covenant: an agreement between
two parties that involves both
rights and responsibilities.
contract, each party is self-centered: "What's in
it for me?" "What are my rights?" "What can
I expect." If a contract is broken, the parties
usually go to court. A covenant, on the other
hand, is other-centered: "What do I promise to
do for others?" "How will I serve them?" "How
can I exceed their expectations?" Marriage is
an example of a covenant. When two people marry, each person makes a vow that clarifies
what he or she will do, not what the other person will do.
In the Bible, we read that God explicitly initiated at least four covenants. In each case,
God chose his covenant partner and set out the expectations without human input. In this
sense, a covenant is similar to a vow or promise. God's covenants both declare promises of
God's commitment and express expectations of human faithfulness.
CHAPTER 7 | 101


<!-- page-7 -->

Tower of Babel,
artwork based
on 16th century
painting by
Pieter Brueghel
the Elder
102 | CHAPTER 7
The first covenant God made was with Noah. God decided that he would never again
"curse the ground" (Genesis 8:21) or destroy all living things on the carth by means of a
flood. He placed a rainbow in the sky as a reminder of his covenant with all creation.
God also expressed hopes for Noah and his descendants. They were to "be fruitful and
multiply and fill the earth" (Genesis 9:1). This is the same command God gave to Adam
and Eve in the garden of Eden. In some ways, the earth after the flood was a new creation,
and Noah was to partner with God in bringing life and abundance from it. Unlike the
original creation, however, animals and people would now fear one another. God specified
that human beings were free to eat animals (Genesis 9:2-3). In addition, God instructed
Noah and his sons that anyone who killed a person should be
punished (Genesis 9:6).
What is important about this covenant is that God knew
Noah and his descendants would break it (Genesis 9:7-13).
Nonetheless, God promised not to destroy the earth with a
flood again. Even if (and when) human beings failed, God
would not. This is good news, because before Noah's story
ends, we see that the flood did not stop people from sinning.
After the flood, Noah planted a vineyard and got drunk.
While he was drunk, Noah lay naked in his tent and his son
Ham shamed him. 2º This resulted in Noah cursing Ham's
son Canaan (Genesis 9:20-28).
We see further evidence that the rebellious heart of people
had not changed. Some people decided to build a tower that
would reach to heaven —the tower of Babel. They wanted to
make a name for themselves. God knew that if the people
were all united against God, their wickedness would soar to
incredible heights. So, God confused their language, graciously allowing people to still
speak to at least some others. People groups were able to form around common languages
and spread out on the earth.2
10. Conclusion
In this chapter, we saw how shalom was shattered when Adam and Eve believed the lies
of the serpent and rebelled against the God who made and loved them. We saw that sin is
not a made-up concept to spoil our fun. Rather, sin is a failure to love God and others as
we should, an act of betrayal or rebellion, and a willingness to choose what is wicked over
what is good. Sin is a failure to be who God created us to be. When we sin, we don't just
break a law, we act against our design.
When sin happens, relationships break down. The greatest fallout is the breaking of
our relationship with God. The Bible is clear that we are estranged from God because
of our sin. God wishes to reach out to us in love and forgiveness, but often we are too
mistrustful of God to see this. Our sin causes us to doubt his goodness and believe lies
about him. Our sin also causes breakdowns in our relationships with nature, ourselves,
and others. Sin results in hurt, trustration, pain, suttering, violence, destruction, abuse
and inner turmoil. Try as we might, we cannot remove sin from the world. We are all part
of the problem, broken by sin. We cannot fix ourselves, and
we cannot blame anyone else.
The good news is that there is hope. God loves us more
than we could ever know. He has not, and will not, abandon
his world or the people in it. The stories in Genesis 1-11
(Adam and Eve, Cain and Abel, Noah and the flood, and
the tower of Babel) reveal important truths about God's
response to sin. We learn that God is grieved by our sin and
will not forever tolerate our destroying his world and the
people in it. He will not allow rebellion and wickedness to
continue unabated. Yet even in the midst of judgment, God
is incredibly gracious, continually reaching out to people,
offering them forgiveness, mercy, and love.
All throughout the rest of the Old Testament-from
Genesis 3 on—God is relentless in working to save, protect, and preserve his people and
his creation. He seeks to forgive, heal, and restore. God's commitment knows no bounds.
In the next chapter, we'll see how God chose one person and one nation to bring blessing
to the whole world. We'll see the continuing effects of the fall, but we'll also see how God
worked through his people, despite their sin, to bring blessing to all the earth.
ENDNOTES
' See Bible Project, "Bad Words Series: Khata/Sin," BibleProject.com, video, 5:43, https://bibleproject.com/
explore/video/khata-sin
'Michael Reeves, Delighting in the Trinity: An Introduction to the Christian Faith (Downers Grove, IL: IVP
Academic, 2012), 65-68.
lain Provan, Seriously Dangerous Religion: What the Old Testament Really Says and Why It Matters Waco,
TX: Baylor University Press, 2014), 111.
"John Sailhamer, The Pentateuch as Narrative: A Biblical-Theological Commentary (Grand Rapids, MI:
Zondervan, 1992), 103.
Provan, Seriously Dangerous Religion, 113-114.
"Provan, Seriously Dangerous Religion, 114.
Sailhamer, Pentateuch as Narrative, 110.
*Craig G. Bartholomew and Michael W. Goheen, The Drama of Scripture: Finding Our Place in the Biblical
Story (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2004), 43-44.
'Henry Francis Lyte, "Abide with Me," Hymnary.org, https/hymnary.org/rexc/abide.wich_me_fas_ falls
INTimothy Keller, Every Good Endeavor: Connecting Your Work to God's Work (New York: Duron, 2012),
"Chesna Hinkley, "What to Say When Someone Says That Pariarchy Is God's Plan, CBE Internacione.-
April 9, 2019, https://www.cbeinternational.org/resourcc/article/mucualiry-blog-magazine/wharsay-when-
someone-says-patriarchy-gods-plan.
I2Provan, Seriously Dangerous Religion, 118.
CHAPTER 7 | 103


<!-- page-8 (book p.105) -->

1'See for example, David G. Allan, "Breaking News Alert: People Are Inherently Good, Nonviolent," CNN,
December 11, 2018, https://www.cnn.com/2018/12/11/health/nonviolence-good-wisdom-project: Abraham
Maslow, Humanistic Psychology I, ed. David Welch, George A. Tate and Fred Richards, (Buffalo, NY:
Prometheus Books, 1978), 11.
14"Munk Debate on Religion—Christopher Hitchens Opening Remarks," YouTube, January 31, 2011,
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rYMyxa5fysI.
15 "What's Wrong with the World?", The Society of G. K. Chesterton, April 29, 2012, https://www.chesterton.
org/wrong-with-world/.
16See John Walton, Genesis: The NIV Application Commentary (Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2001),
260-63.
'See Provan, Seriously Dangerous Religion, 192; Sailhamer, Pentateuch as Narrative, 112.
18Tremper Longman III, How to Read Genesis (Downers Grove, IL: Inter Varsity Press, 2005), 115.
"Walton, Genesis, 278-79.
2°Many commentators acknowledge a certain amount of ambiguity as to what actually happened in this
story. See Bartholomew and Goheen, Drama of Scripture, 51; lain Provan, Discovering Genesis: Content,
Interpretation, Reception (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 2015), 125; Sailhamer, Pentateuch as Narrative, 129;
and Walton, Genesis, 345-49.
2'Longman, How to Read Genesis, 121.
Act 3: Redemption
Initiated-Israel
1. The Family of Abraham
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to explain God's covenant with Abraham and list
the two descendants who received the covenant blessing.
In the previous chapter, we saw how Adam and Eve rebelled against God, bringing sin and
destruction into the world. We also saw that God continued to be gracious and committed
to his creation. But we were left wondering how God would crush the head of the serpent
and how God would deal with the mess sin caused.
In Genesis 12:1-3, God chose a man named Abram (later renamed Abraham) and
called him to move to a new country. God promised that Abraham and his wite, Sarah,
104 | CHAPTER7
