# Chapter 9

<!-- page-1 (book p.555) -->

Interlude The
Second Temple
Period
1. Daniel's Vision and the Return from Exile
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to name the empires represented in Daniel's
VISIon.
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to give examples of the challenges Jews returning
from exile faced.
At the close of our last chapter, the people of Israel had been sent into exile. While
in Babylon, the prophet Daniel had a strange vision in which he saw four beasts that
represented four kings (or kingdoms) that would rule on Earth. The beasts can be
associated with the following empires:!
• First Beast: Babylonian Empire (Daniel 7:4)
• Second Beast: Medo-Persian Empire (Daniel 7:5)
• Third Beast: Greek Empire (Daniel 7:6)
• Fourth Beast: Roman Empire (Daniel 7:7-Rome
is not explicitly identified in the text.)
In this and the next three sections, we will see how the
beasts appeared in Israel's history. During Daniel's life,
the Babylonian Empire (the first beast) was conquered
by the Medes and Persians (the second beast). In 539 Bc,
King Cyrus of Persia took control of the empire. The
prophet Isaiah had spoken of Cyrus as one who would be
God's instrument in returning the Jewish exiles to their
homeland (Isaiah 44:23-45:8). In 538 Bc, Cyrus issued
a decree allowing the Jewish exiles in Babylon to return
to Jerusalem and rebuild the temple (Ezra 1:1-4). Under
the leadership of Zerubbabel, a descendant of King David
and Joshua the priest, many Jews returned to Jerusalem to
complete this task (Ezra 1-3).
All this was very encouraging, and the returned exiles were filled with hope. However,
things didn't turn out the way they had expected. The rebuilding of the temple caused
some to rejoice, but those who had seen the previous temple wept (Ezra 3:10-13). While
work on the temple was going on, some people living around Jerusalem, identified as
"adversaries of Judah and Benjamin" (Ezra 4:1), came to help but were told to get lost.
After this, they began to cause trouble for the returned exiles (Ezra 4-5).
Sixty years later, Ezra, a priest and expert on the Torah, came to Jerusalem and began
instituting reforms and encouraging the Jewish people to observe God's laws (Ezra 7-10).=
He renewed festivals, instructed the people to follow God, and took particular issue with
Jews marrying foreign wives (Ezra 9-10).3
Not all Jews had returned to Jerusalem to rebuild the temple. The biblical book of
Esther tells the story of Jews who still remained in Persia during the reign of King Xerxes
(486-465 c), which may have occurred around the same time that Ezra was in Jerusalem.
The story focuses on Esther, a young Jewish woman, who was elevated
to the position of queen alongside Xerxes. Her surrogate father,
Mordecai, was faithful to God; he refused to bow down before
Xerxes political advisor Haman. Upset over this slight, Haman
hatched a plot to have all the Jews in Persia executed. In a
bold gesture, Esther came before Xerxes, eventually exposed
Haman's plot, and became the rescuer of her people. The story
ends with the Jews being saved, Esther praised, and Mordecai
elevated to high office.
Back in Jerusalem, some twenty years after Ezra's arrival,
Nehemiah came to help the Jewish people rebuild the walls of
Daniel's vision.
from the 11th
century French
manuscript
Apocalypse of
Saint-Sever
CHAPTER 9 | 121


<!-- page-2 -->

122 | CHAPTER 9
Jerusalem. Though he had the support of King Artaxerxes, Nehemiah was opposed by
some of the same people who tried to previously hinder the rebuilding of the temple.
Nehemiah's leadership was also somewhat ambiguous. When his program of reform and
rebuilding didn't meet with success, he lost his temper and beat people, pulled out their
hair, and forced them to take oaths (Nehemiah 13). Given the many years that God's
people had spent in exile for their sin, Nehemiah's frustration over their indifference is
understandable, but his own actions left much to be desired.
2. Alexander the Great and Hellenization
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to recount the rise of Greek culture during the
intertestamental period.
The biblical prophets had spoken of a day when God would once again dwell among his
people, the nations would worship Yahweh, and God's people would be given new hearts
to truly love God and others. But the return from exile hadn't resulted in the glorious
kingdom the Jews had hoped would be restored. Instead, the people of Israel and their
leaders fell into some of the same sins
that had sent them into exile in the first
place. As the last Old Testament prophet,
& hellenization:
the spread of
Greek culture
throughout
the conquered
lands of ancient
Europe, North
Africa, and the
Middle East
Malachi, called out Israel for profaning
God's name, practicing injustice, and
continuing in unfaithfulness, a curtain of
silence descended on Israel. There would be
no direct prophetic word from God for the
The interval between the final events
of the Old Testament and the coming of
Jesus in the New Testament is often referred
to as the intertestamental period, which
lasted from roughly 400 Bc to the early
first century AD when John the Baptist began his ministry. It is also sometimes called the
second temple period, spanning from the rebuilding of the Jerusalem temple in 515 Bc to the
destruction of that temple in AD 70.4
The Medo-Persian Empire endured for 200 years before it was conquered by Alexander
the Great around 333 c. In just a few short years, Alexander conquered most of the
Mediterranean world, which amounted to a huge empire. Alexander initiated the spread of
Greek culture throughout the conquered lands of ancient Europe, North Africa, and the Middle
East in a process called hellenization. People across his empire began patterning their lives
on Greek values and embracing Greek culture (including language, arts, ideas, religion,
and government).
However, the young Alexander's glory did not last. At 32 years of age, Alexander
abruptly died, and his kingdom was divided among four of his military commanders
(many believe this was a fulfillment of Daniel's prophecy in Daniel 8:5-8, 21-22). Two
of these were Ptolemy and Seleucus. The Ptolemies ruled Judea (the territory that included
FOUNDATIONS G
he city of Jerusalem) until 198 c, when the Seleucid general Antiochus III defeated
Prolemy V in a decisive victory. Ihroughout much of the Greek era, the lewish people
living in Judea had experienced relative independence. On the whole, they were free to
live their lives in peace and to worship Yahweh in obedience to the Torah. There were no
major uprisings against the ruling powers.
Though Alexander's empire did not survive his death, the influence of the Greek
culture he had introduced lasted almost 1,000 years? Hellenization established Greek
as the common language throughout the Mediterranean world. During this period, the
Old Testament was translated from Hebrew into Greek (this is the translation known as
the Septuagint) This common culture and language would aid the spread of the gospel
after Jesus death. But hellenization also had a dark side. The push for hellenization could
run right over a local culture, and this became a particular problem for Jews. The Jewish
people divided over how to respond to this pressure. Some, seeking to fit in, accepted
Greek ideas without debate. Others saw hellenization as a threat to the Jewish way of life
and regarded those who accepted hellenization as traitors?
3. Antiochus IV and the Maccabees
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to explain the factors that led to the Maccabean
The pressure to hellenize came to a high point when the Seleucid monarch Antiochus IV
came to power in 168 Bc.'° Antiochus took the name Epiphanes (which means God manifest)
and arrogantly asserted his authority over the Jews." In a violent campaign, he attacked
Jerusalem and raided the temple (1 Maccabees 1:20-24, Apocrypha). Later, Antiochus
outlawed many Jewish customs such as Sabbath observance, circumcision, and temple
sacrifice. He demanded the Jews build altars to worship idols, threatening death for those
who disobeyed (1 Maccabees 1:41-50). He outraged the
Jews by offering a pig on the altar, profaning the temple?
and renaming it "the temple of Olympian Zeus" (2
Maccabees 6:2). Soon, prostitution was practiced there,
and Jews were forced to take part in celebrations for
Greek gods (2 Maccabees 6:2-7).13 The Jews nicknamed
Antiochus Epimanes (a play on Epiphanes meaning the
madman). 4 Some saw Antiochus' actions as a parallel
to Daniel 9:24-27 and 11:21-45.' Clearly, the Jews
suffered greatly under Antiochus, and eventually, this led
the Jews to revolt.
An old priest named Mattathias stirred a revolt when
he defied the king's order by refusing to offer a sacrifice to pagan gods. When another
Jew went ahead with the sacrifice, Mattathias killed him and the king's oficial who was
enforcing the law. Mattathias and his five sons then fed to the wilderness wich many other
lews (1 Maccabees 2), eventually forming a rebellion under the leadership of Mattathias's
third son Judah, who earned the nickname Macabee, which means the hammer.
Mattathias
blesses his
sons, 1877
woodcut
by Julius
Schnorr von
Carolsfeld
CHAPTER 9 / 123
S Interlude-The Second Temple Period


<!-- page-3 -->

124 | CHAPTER 9
Their campaign against Antiochus met with great success. The Maccabees proved to
be able military leaders, zealous for the God of Israel. On December 25, 164 Bc, Judah
Maccabee rode into Jerusalem with his army (amidst shouts of "hosanna' and the waving
of palm branches) and cleansed the temple. This
event started Hanukkah, a yearly Jewish festival that
celebrates the cleansing and rededication of the temple!6
John 10:22 tells us that Jesus was at a Hanukkah
celebration.
The Maccabees continued to do battle with their
enemies. By 142 Bc, they won Jewish independence.
& Hanukkah:
a yearly Jewish festival that
celebrates the cleansing and
rededication of the temple
For all practical purposes, the Maccabean leaders
were seen as Moses—or messiah-like figures. They
had conquered Israel's enemies and restored true
worship in the temple. People dreamed that Judea
would once again become the great kingdom that it
was under David. But it quickly became apparent that neither Judah Maccabee nor any of
his brothers was the one that Israel had been hoping for.?
After Judah's death, the Maccabee family and their descendants, the Hasmoneans,
became tyrants. They took over the high priesthood and acted like kings. Some, like
Alexander Janneus, were almost as bad as Antiochus IV. Under his rule, hellenization went
ahead full steam and he brutally punished his enemies (crucifying over 800 men while
murdering their wives and children in front of them. The Maccabean campaign for
freedom had begun as an attempt to free Israel from foreign domination so that the Jews
could live in obedience to the Torah and worship Yahweh, but it quickly descended into
chaos and wickedness. The hard-won independence would not last. In 63 Bc, the Roman
general Pompey conquered Jerusalem, ushering in almost 500 years of Roman rule.!
4. Herod, Pilate, and Roman Rule
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to paraphrase how the rise of the Roman Empire
set the stage for the birth, life, and death of Christ.
Rome may have been the fourth beast Daniel spoke of. At first, the Romans chose to rule
the Jews through the "client king," Herod the Great? Though he claimed to be a Jew,
Herod was really the son of an Edomite and had been made governor of Galilee with the
help of Rome. Later, the Roman Senate appointed him "king of the Jews. He assumed
total leadership of Judea in 37 Bc. Herod is mentioned in the Bible in connection with
Jesus birth (which occurred sometime between 7-4 Bc). 2 In Matthew 2, Herod acts very
much like Pharaoh in the Exodus account. Having heard prophecies about a coming ruler,
Herod, fearful of any who would challenge his leadership, ordered the slaughter of all boys
under two in Bethlehem (where the Messiah was supposed to be born).
This action is characteristic of what we know about Herod from history. He was power-
hungry and paranoid about losing his power. For this reason, he had many of his own
family killed, and he drowned and burned those who opposed him. Even on his deathbed,
FOUNDATIONS 5
he ordered the slaughter of many of his enemies. Herod was ruthless, but he was also
competent leader. Keen to gain the support of the lewish people, Herod mode significant
improvements to the Jewish temple. By the time of his death in 4 Bc, the temple was
magnificent structure.
Even so, Judea became a hotbed for rebellion. Various figures claimed to be the messia
who would lead the Jews to victory against their Roman oppressors. Frequent uprisings
made keeping the peace in Judea a difficult task. Shortly after Herod's death, Rome had
Roman governors, called prefects, rule Judea. Pontius Pilate, who handed Jesus over to be
crucified, was one of these. According to historians, Pilate was brutal, unfair, and a poor
administrator. A few vears after Jesus' crucifixion, Pilate was sent back to Rome to answer
for his poor leadership. Eventually, he committed suicide.?
Overlapping with Herod's reign and continuing afterward was a period of relative
peace and stability in the Roman Empire outside Judea. In 31 BC, Octavian defeated Mark
Antony and Cleopatra to become the first emperor of Rome. Octavian's reign ushered in
the Pax Romana ("Roman Peace"), a period that would last for 200 years. During this
time, the Romans built numerous roads and highways, which made travel across the
empire much easier and safer than it had been before. It was the golden age of Rome.
Yet, Rome could be a cruel master. Octavian took the name Caesar Augustus (Augustus
means "majestic one"), and the cult of emperor worship began. Caesar Augustus (as well
as those who came after him) claimed to be "king of
kings" and demanded absolute obedience and loyalty.24
It was dangerous to defy Rome or question Caesar's
lordship. The empire notoriously used crucifixion as a way
to put down rebels. It was one of the most humiliating
and brutal forms of torture ever invented. Crucifixion was
so horrible that Roman citizens did not even speak of it
in polite society. The Romans used crucifixion to crush
opposition, to "show subject peoples who was in charge
and ... break the spirit of any resistance." During Roman
rule, thousands of Jews were executed in this way?
5. Key Jewish Symbols
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to describe the four key Jewish symbols during
the second temple period.
This brief timeline of events from Babylon to Rome brings us to the time of Jesus. Bur
before we talk about him, we need to look at some core symbols, groups, and beliefs that
arose or became prominent during the second temple period. Le's begin wich symbols.
New Testament historian N. T. Wright has identified four symbols that shaped the
everyday life of the Jewish people?
Temple. For Jews, the temple in Jerusalem was the center of all religious and politica
life. The temple (and the tabernacle before it) was supposed to be the place where God
Statue CAESAR
Augustus
PATRÍAE PATER,
Rome, Italy
CHAPTER 9 / 125


<!-- page-4 -->

came to dwell among his people. Throughout the second temple period, Jewish identity
was under threat from foreign influence, particularly hellenization. One of the ways that
Jews maintained their identity was by keeping up the
PALISTINA.
sacrifices, worship, and prayer at the temple. By Herod's
day, there were three courts around the temple. The
outer court was open to foreigners, but only Jewish men
and their wives could enter the middle court. The inner
court was reserved for Jewish men in a state of purity;
within that space was the sanctuary, where only the
priests were allowed to perform sacrifices and rituals?
Land. When God promised Abraham that he would
make of him a great nation in Genesis 12, he also
promised to give Abraham land on which his people
could settle and prosper. As we have seen, the Israelites
conquered the land, settled it, and then were kicked
off it because of their sin. But with the return from
exile, Jews in this period believed that the land of Judea
belonged only to God's people. It was supposed to be
like a new Eden where God's people could live in a state
of shalom. The land was a great point of tension during
the second temple period because many people occupied the land—not only descendants
of the tribes that Israel had conquered, but also foreign invaders. Pagan temples, Greek
gymnasiums, and Roman symbols were seen as blights on the land. Jews eagerly awaited
the day when God would cleanse the land of foreign influence.
Torah. Throughout a long and troubled history, Israel had learned the dangers of idolatry.
In order to stay on the land, the Jewish people believed that they had to be faithful to
the commands given in the Torah. The five books of the Torah provided instructions for
how to worship in the temple and for the behavior that was to characterize God's people.
Instruction in the Torah was offered in the temple. Torah study and observance became
especially important for those Jews living outside of Judea. It set Jews apart from their
pagan neighbors, marking them out as God's people.
Racial Identity. According to Jewish thinking of the time, the true people of God
consisted of descendants of Abraham. They saw themselves as the only inheritors of
God's promises. The Jews had been commanded not to intermarry (to prevent idolatry,
Deuteronomy 7:1-5), so Ezra stressed lineage (Ezra 2:1-62) and decried intermarriage
(Ezra 9-10). It is thought that Jewish-Samaritan tensions after the exile escalated into
ethnic prejudice, 2 though politics and theology played a major role in their mutual
contempt, " Moreover, the mark of a true Jewish male was circumcision, so Antiochus IV's
outlawing of the practice was seen as a threat to Jewish identity. For most Jews, practicing
circumcision and avoiding intermarriage were the primary ways to be set apart for God.
126 | CHAPTER 9
6. The Diaspora, the Synagogue, and the
Samaritans
• OBJECTIVE: You Will Badsip aramo discuss the role of synagogues post-exile and
how Jews and Samaritans related to one another.
Not all Jews lived in Judea. Many chose not to return from the Babylonian exile; others
were dispersed among the nations. In fact, by the nist century AD there were approximately
rive million jews living outside Judya, greatly outnumbering the Jews in Judea. The
largest population of Jews resided in Alexandria, in Egypt, but there were many Jewish
communities in other lands. These groups became
known collectively as the Diaspora. Though they had
their own distinctive practices, these groups looked
to Jerusalem as their homeland and to the temple as
the true house of worship. 30
For those Jews living outside of Judea, who had
& synagogues
a Jewish meeting place for
Torah study, prayer, and
discussion
no access to the temple, the study of the Torah
became critically important. Sometime during the
exile or soon after, Jews began gathering together
in the local synagogue, a Jewish meeting place for
Torah study, prayer, and discussion of issues relevant
to the Jewish community.
Not all synagogues served the same function," and they were not seen as a replacement
for the temple, but rather as a supplement to it. Synagogues appear frequently in the New
Testament. Jesus is found teaching there on more than one occasion (Luke 4:15-37, John
6:22-59), and the apostle Paul often began his missionary activity in the synagogue of
whatever city he happened to be in (Acts 17:2-3).
In addition to the Diaspora Jews, there were the Samaritans, a people group who were
likely descendants of the sraelites from the northern kingdom who lived in Samaria and
had intermarried with the Assyrians after the
conquest of the northern kingdom in 722 вc,32
though their specific identity is hard to pin
1 Samaritans:
Israelites from the
northern kingdom who
lived in Samaria and had
intermarried with the
Assyrians
down. The New Testament is clear that Jews and
Samaritans had a strong dislike for one another
(Luke 9:52-54, 10:25-37; John 4:1-42).
When the Jews returning from exile refused
to let the Samaritans help rebuild the temple,
the Samaritans built their own temple on
Mount Gerizim as a rival to the temple in
Jerusalem. Because of this, Jews regarded them
as outside of God's true people and looked at
them with disdain. On the whole, the Jews in Judea held a superior and deeply prejudiced
attitude toward Samaritans.
CHAPTER 9 | 127


<!-- page-5 -->

The Samaritans also hated the Jews. Some may have been among those who attempted
to hinder the rebuilding of the temple and wrote letters to foreign rulers accusing the Jews
of treachery against the government (Ezra 4-5). The ancient historian Josephus records that
during the terrible reign of Antiochus IV, the Samaritans wrote a letter to Antiochus in
which they disowned the Jews, claimed they weren't related to them, and asked Antiochus
to let them dedicate their temple to Jupiter Hellenius (that is, Zeus) 34 It is no wonder that
Jewish "hatred" for Samaritans was so strong "that to be called a Samaritan was a grievous
insult." 3 In light of this, Jesus' actions in regard to Samaritans were countercultural. He
spoke willingly and kindly to a Samaritan woman (John 4:1-42), and he told a story to
Jews in which a Samaritan turned out to be the good guy (Luke 10:25-37).
7. Jewish Factions
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to list and describe the four Jewish factions that
emerged during the second temple period.
In response to the continuing pressure of hellenization and the oppression of Roman rule,
the Jews splintered into at least four different groups during the second temple period—
the Pharisees, Sadducees, Essenes, and Zealots.
Pharisees: The Pharisees were Jewish leaders who taught strict observance of the Torah and
oral tradition. They were the largest group of leaders and were popular and respected
by the common people. They resisted hellenization, stood for the old ways or traditions
of Israel, and obeyed oral laws passed down from their ancestors. The Pharisees were
concerned with ensuring all Jews were obeying
the laws of God and live purely as God's
chosen people. Only then, they believed,
would God come to rescue his people. In the
New Testament, the Pharisees are identified
numerous times as the primary adversaries of
& Pharisees:
Jewish leaders who taught
strict observance of the Torah
and oral tradition
Jesus. In Matthew 23:1-36, Jesus called them
out for their showy observance of traditions
while being inwardly prideful, corrupt, and
wicked. He called them hypocrites who laid
heavy burdens on others but refused to carry
those burdens themselves. Instead of faithfully
leading Israel in obedience to God, Jesus said
that the Pharisees were like the blind leading the blind.
Sadducees: In contrast to the Pharisees, the Sadducees were Jewish priests and teachers
from the upper classes who cooperated with the ruling powers. They gladly worked with the
Hasmoneans and Romans to maintain the peace and their own power? They also held
the majority on the Sanhedrin (a ruling council of priests, elders, and teachers in Jerusalem
that put Jesus on trial in Mark 14:53-65), 38 We know that, unlike the Pharisees, they held
only to the Torah and did not observe the oral laws and traditions They are often found
128 | CHAPTER 9
in opposition to Jesus in the New Testament, and from him we learn that they did no
believe in the resurrection (Matthew 22:23-46).
see Men sens mr an extreme group In their yes, the temple in Jerusalem had
become so corrupt that they could no longer worship there, the priests were illegitimate
and the people were failing to live in obedience to God and observe the Sabbath. In
opposition, the Essenes left for the desert and formed communities centered around
self-control, avoidance of luxury, and intense ritual. They believed themselves to be the
"true Israel," the sole inheritors of God's promises to Abraham." Though not mentioned
in the New Testament, many scholars believe
that a group of Essenes living in Qumran were
responsible for producing the Dead Sea Scrolls.
Zealots: The Zealots were political
revolutionaries who tolerated "no king but
God!" They advocated for the violent overthrow
of the Romans and were willing to die for
their convictions. The Zealots may have arisen
around the time of Jesus' birth. Up until the
time of the destruction of the temple in AD 70,
- Sadducees:
Jewish priests
and teachers from
the upper classes
who cooperated
with the
ruling
powers
they were involved in numerous uprisings and
skirmishes with the Romans.*3 Among them
was a group who went even further—the Sicari, known for carrying daggers and stabbing
compromising Jews. It is possible that one of Jesus' disciples may have originally been a
Zealot (Luke 6:15).
8. Literature and Theology in the Second Temple
Period
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to give examples of literature from the second
temple period.
At the beginning of this chapter, we noted that there were no new revelations from God
during the second temple period. However, there were numerous books being writen by
Jews-including 1-2 Maccabees, Judith, Tobit, Bel and the Dragon, Wisdom of Solomon,
and many more. These books record the history of the Jews, tell stories about God's people
in exile. or offer wisdom for living in a pagan culture. Todav. these books make up the
Apocrypha, which we briefly discussed in Chapter 2. We have already talked abour 1-2
Maccabees. Let's consider a few other books.
The book of Tobit tells the story of two Jewish exiles from the northern Kingdom
who both experience persecution-Tobit loses his job because of his faithfulness to God,
while Sarah, another faithful lew, experiences persecution from a demon that killed off
her husband every time she got married (seven times). Both are righteous characters who
eventually are vindicated by God through the help of an angel.
CHAPTER 9 / 129


<!-- page-6 -->

The Trial of
Susanna before
the Elders,
painting, c.
130 | CHAPTER 9
The book of Susanna tells the story of a faithful Jewish woman who is falsely accused of
adultery by two wicked Jewish elders trying to blackmail her. She refuses to compromise
and is almost stoned, but the young prophet Daniel intervenes. The two wicked Jewish
elders are exposed and Susanna is proclaimed
innocent. Susanna's story is considered "one of the
world's first detective stories. It is included in
Catholic and Orthodox Bibles as two chapters at the
end of the book of Daniel.
Bel and the Dragon is another story about the
prophet Daniel, in which he demonstrates the
foolishness of idol worship to the Babylonian king.
In a time when God seemed silent, these stories
would have encouraged the Jews to remain faithful to
God in whatever setting they found themselves. These
and many other books of the Apocrypha also provide
an interesting look into Jewish thought during the second temple period. For example,
though the Bible speaks often of angels and demons, during the second temple period,
ideas about these spiritual beings and the role they play in human affairs were extensively
developed." Jews also held tightly to monotheism (belief in only one God) during this
time. The Jews believed that the exile had been the result of their idolatry; therefore, they
needed to repent and abstain from idolatry at all costs. Belief in the resurrection from the
dead also became popular. Daniel 12:2 prophesies about some people being raised to life
and others to destruction. It is hard to say exactly what most Jews believed during this time
about resurrection, but at least some believed that all God's people would be raised together
when God redeemed Israel. However, no one was expecting any one person to rise from the
dead before that time.
In addition to the Apocrypha, several other important writings from the second temple
period have survived. Philo, a Jewish philosopher living in Egypt, attempted to integrate
Greek and Jewish ideas in his writings. The Jewish historian Flavius Josephus wrote
much of the history of the second temple period. Strangely, he argued that the emperor
Vespasian was actually the world ruler that the prophet Daniel predicted in Daniel 2:44,
the messiah figure that Israel had been waiting for.* It was also during this time that the
Dead Sea Scrolls were produced. Together, these sources provide invaluable information
for our understanding of Jewish thought and life during the second temple period.
%. The Hopes of Israel
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to restate the five hopes of the Jewish people
during the second temple period.
Much of the Jewish writing from the second temple period is full of expectation and hope.
But what exactly were the Jews hoping for? They hoped for at least five things:48
Salvation from their enemies. Jews who were familiar with the Scriptures knew that God
had rescued his people from slavery to the Egyptians. They hoped that God would rescue
FOUNDATIONS 5
them again-this time from their Roman oppressors. Though Rome seemed unbeatabl
the Jews knew that the prophet Daniel had spoken of four kingdoms, all of which would
be crushed. Ultimately, "one like a son of man" would be given all power and authority
to rule over all nations (Daniel 7:13-14). The prophet Zechariah had also spoken of the
coming of the Lord when Jerusalem would be raised up and Israel's enemies would be
judged (Zechariah 14).
The establishment of a state of shalom. Long ago, God promised Abraham chat the
land of Canaan would be home to his descendants. Yet, for most of the second temple
period, it was a battleground. Judea changed hands numerous times first Babylon, then
Persia, then Greece, and now Rome. What the average Jew would have most wanted was
shalom, including freedom to go about one's business and to worship God without fear of
oppression or brutality. One day, they hoped, God would grant them that peace.
The arrival of God's kingdom and rule over Israel and the world. The Old Testament
kings of Israel and Judah had failed to lead the nation well. Now, the Jews hoped for a true
king from the line of David who would rule with justice and faithfulness. Additionally,
they believed that when God finally arrived and established his rule, his kingdom would
extend far beyond Israel. God would rule over all nations. And with a true king ruling in
Jerusalem, Israel would be placed at the head of all the nations.
The forgiveness of sins. People like Ezra, Nehemiah, and Mattathias, and groups like
the Pharisees and the Essenes were all concerned about Israel's disobedience to God. They
knew that Israel had been exiled due to unfaithfulness to God's covenant. God's people
were failing to be the people they were created to be-people who truly loved God and
others. Israel had a sin problem. Jews believed that
when God arrived, he would deal with their sin,
cleansing them from their wickedness and giving
them new hearts so that they could live freely and
faithfully in his presence.
A messiah who would lead Israel. The word
messiah refers to the LORD's anointed. It should be
noted that not all Jews expected a messiah, and
those who did had different ideas about what
the messiah would actually be like. It seems that
for many Jews of the time, the particular kind
of messiah they wanted was one who would be a
military figure, one who would ride into Jerusalem and crush the Romans in battle.*
These hopes sustained the faith of many Jews through the unpredictable and chaotic
period of the second temple. Meanwhile, God never abandoned his people, but continued.
to work in hidden ways.
CHAPTER 9 | 131


<!-- page-7 -->

10. Conclusion
The history we have surveyed in this chapter provides important background for
understanding the next great act in the biblical drama. Israel's story was still waiting
for a satisfying ending. The period of 400 years from Malachi to John the Baptist was
a very discouraging time for God's people. When the Jews returned from Babylon to
rebuild the temple in Jerusalem, many hoped that the moment when all would be set
right had finally arrived, yet the return from exile didn't work out like they had expected.
As nation after nation ruled over Judea, Jews faced mounting pressure to conform to the
dominant culture. Antiochus IV's rule sent the
nation into crisis. Some would have thought that
Judah Maccabee's cleansing of the temple was the
beginning of God's promises finally being fulfilled.
However, the Maccabees soon proved themselves to
be poor, corrupt leaders. When Rome took over, the
situation seemed all the more hopeless.
God had promised to be faithful to his covenant
with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, but where was
he? When would he fulfill his promises? When
would Israel be rescued from oppression? When
would they be free to live and worship in peace?
Jews living all over the world hoped that soon they would get some answers. In the
meantime, they tried to remain faithful to God, but how to do so and prepare for God's
coming were divisive issues. The Pharisees thought it best to meticulously obey the Torah
and the traditions while resisting the foreign powers. The Sadducees tried to get on with
the dominant culture as best as they could to maintain peace and comfort. The Essenes
decided to withdraw from society altogether, while the Zealots used violence to try to
overthrow their oppressors.
In the midst of all this, Jewish authors sought to encourage the people to remember
God's past faithfulness and to demonstrate how God would vindicate his people.
Moreover, many doctrines arose to help explain what was going on and to affirm that God
was still sovereign. Living in this time certainly required great endurance and hope.
Many people today can relate. The world seems to be trapped in a hopeless cycle of
violence and chaos. When we look at what is going on in the world, it is hard not to get
discouraged. Where is God? Why doesn't he do something? And so, people today look for a
messiah-like figure who will arise and put everything right. They turn to political leaders or
join causes they think have the answer, but none ultimately succeed. Is there any hope?
In the next chapter, we'll see that God's apparent silence during the second temple
period was not a sign that he had abandoned his people. Indeed, God would be faithful to
his covenant promises, save Israel, and defeat the true enemy. But his work wouldn't look
anything like what God's people had expected. And it wouldn't come on their timeline.
Instead, at just the right time, "God sent forth his Son ... to redeem" (Galatians 4:4-5).
The promised one who would crush the head of the serpent was about to arrive. And hi
who's ever lived, including you and me.
coming would be good news not just for the Jews in the first century, but also for everyone
ENDNOTES
'Not all scholars agree on the interpretation of the beasts given here. Though the first three beasts seem to
be identified in the text, the foups [Te 10N, s not. The book of Daniel is not written in chronological order.
Chapters 2 and 7 both occur duraynuapı acabylonian period, and scholars see some similarity berween the
four kingdoms of the statue in chapter 2:31-35 and the four beasts in chapter 7:1-8. In addition, the ram
and the goat in chapter 8:1-14 are seen as comparable to the second and third beasts from chapter 7. The
assumption of Rome as the fourth beast comes from the fact that in chapter 239-40, the kingdoms come
one right after another. As Rome was the next great world empire after Greece, it is highly probable that it
is the fourth beast. Some, however, separate the Medo-Persian empire so that the four beasts are identified
as Babylon, Media, Persia, and Greece. See Joyce G. Baldwin, Daniel: An Introduction and Commentary
(Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 1978), 136-62.
*Craig G. Bartholomew and Michael W. Goheen, The Drama of Scripture: Finding Our Place in the Biblical
Story (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2004), 110-11.
3The Scriptures do not usually advocate the dissolution of marriages. Jesus teaching in the New Testament
suggests that marriage was intended as a lifelong, faithful union (Matthew 5:31-32, 19:3-9; Mark 10:2-
12). Paul says believing spouses should not divorce unbelieving spouses who consent to live with them (1
Corinthians 7:10-16), contrary to what happened in the book of Ezra.
*Andreas J. Köstenberger, L. Scott Kellum, and Charles L. Quarles, The Cradle, the Cross, and the Crown: An
Introduction to the New Testament (Nashville: B&H Publishing Group, 2009), 59.
SE. E. Bruce, New Testament History (New York: Doubleday, 1969), 2-3.
"Shaye J. D. Cohen, From the Maccabees to the Mishnah, 3rd ed. (Louisville: KY, Westminster John Knox
Press, 2014), 2.
'Cohen, 2.
James C. VanderKam, An Introduction to Early Judaism (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 2001), 14.
*John R. Bartlett, "1 Maccabees, in Michael D. Coogan, ed., The New Oxford Annotated Apocrypha: New
Revised Standard Version, 5th ed. (New York: Oxford University Press, 2018), 205-207.
What follows is described in two books from the Apocrypha-1 and 2 Maccabees.
"Bartlett, "1 Maccabees," 207.
12VanderKam, 20.
1VanderKam, 20.
14Köstenberger, Kellum, and Quarles, 68.
Baldwin, Daniel, 172-73, 191-92.
'Bartholomew and Goheen, 120-21.
1 Bartholomew and Goheen, 121.
18 Köstenberger, Kellum, and Quarles, 70-73.
'Bartholomew and Goheen, 121.
20 Köstenberger, Kellum, and Quarles, 74.
2 Rodney Stark, The Triumph of Christianity: How the Jesus Movement Became the World's Larges Religion
(New York: HarperCollins, 2011), 34-35.
22Köstenberger, Kellum, and Quarles, 138.
23 Köstenberger, Kellum, and Quarles, 77.
24R. Alan Street, Caesar and the Sacrament: Baptism: A Rite of Resistance (Eugene, OR: Cascade Books, 2018),
CHAPTER 9 | 133
132 | CHAPTER 9
5 Interlude-The Second Temple Period


<!-- page-8 -->

25N. T. Wright, The Day the Revolution Began: Reconsidering the Meaning of Jesus's Crucifixion (New York:
HarperCollins, 2016), 19, 53-55, 58.
26N. T. Wright, The New Testament and the People of God (Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 1992), 224-32.
2VanderKam, Early Judaism, 202.
28Wright, The New Testament and the People of God, 230-32.
2 Isidore Singer and Cyrus Adler, The Jewish Encyclopedia, Vol. 10, (Funk & Wagnalls Company, New York,
1906), 669-681.
30"Diaspora: Judaism," Encyclopedia Britannica, https://www.britannica.com/topic/Diaspora-Judaism.
3'Cohen, 110-14.
32"Samaritan: Judaism," Encyclopedia Britannica, https://www.britannica.com/topic/Samaritan.
33Stark, 36.
34Flavius Josephus, The Antiquities of the Jews in Josephus: The Complete Works, trans. by William Whiston,
A.M. (Nashville: Thomas Nelson, 1998), 389.
35 Craig A. Evans, "Introduction: Finding a Context for Jesus," in The Missing Jesus: Rabbinic Judaism and the
New Testament, eds. Bruce Chilton, Craig A. Evans, and Jacob Neusner (Leiden: Brill, 2002), 2. As quoted in
Stark, The Triumph of Christianity, 36.
36Wright, The New Testament and the People of God, 181-90.
37 Bartholomew and Goheen, 126.
38Köstenberger, Kellum, and Quarles, 95.
39"Sadducee: Jewish Sect," Encyclopedia Britannica, https://www.britannica.com/topic/Sadducee.
4° Cohen, 160.
4 Bartholomew and Goheen, 125-26.
42Cohen, 163-65.
43Stark, 42-43.
4VanderKam, 69-71.
4Amy C. Merril Willis, "Susanna: Contents and Genre," in Michael D. Coogan, ed., The New Oxford
Annotated Apocrypha, 197.
4 Cohen, 81.
4N. T. Wright, Jesus and the Victory of God (Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 1996), 65, 199, 500-01.
48 Wright, The New Testament and the People of God, 280-338.
4°Stark, 44-45.
Act 4: Redemption
Accomplished
Jesus
1. The Incarnation of Jesus
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to conclude three ways the Incarnation is
significant.
The history we surveyed in the last chapter sets the stage for Act 4 of the Bible's
metanarrative: redemption, accomplished through Jesus. After roughly 400 years
of apparent silence from God, an angel named Gabriel appeared to announce two
pregnancies. The first announcement was to a priest named Zechariah about his wife,
Elizabeth. The other announcement was to a woman named Mary and her fiancé, Joseph.
Gabriel said to Mary:
134|
CHAPTER 9
