# Chapter 11

<!-- page-1 (book p.149) -->

"N. T. Wright, Surprised by Hope: Rethinking Heaven, the Resurection, and the Mission of the Church (New
York: HarperCollins, 2008), 201.
& Wright, 201-202.
• For these and other views of Jesus, see Andreas J. Köstenberger, L. Scort Kellum, and Charles L. Quarles,
The Cradle, the Cross, and the Crown: An Introduction to the New Testament (Nashville: B & H Academic,
2009), 117-25.
1º Bartholomew and Goheen, 146-49.
"See David E. Garland, Mark: NIV Application Commentary (Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 1996),
450-54.
12D. A. Carson, The Gospel According to John: The Pillar New Testament Commentary (Grand Rapids, MI:
William B. Eerdmans, 1991), 412.
13 See R. T. France, The Gospel of Matthew: The New International Commentary on the New Testament (Grand
Rapids, MI: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co., 2007), 160-70.
*John R. W. Stort, The Cross of Christ (Downers Grove, IL: Intervarsity Press, 2006), 29-30.
'N. T. Wright, The Day the Revolution Began: Reconsidering the Meaning of Jesus's Crucifixion (New York:
HarperCollins, 2016), 52-63.
16 Timothy Keller, The Reason for God: Belief in an Age of Skepticism (New York: Riverhead Books, 2008), 210.
1 Wright, Surprised by Hope, 109-117.
18 Wright, 111.
Act 5: Restoration
Initiated The
Church
1. Already and Not Yet
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to express that the kingdom of God is already here
but is not yet fully realized.
As we learned in the last chapter, Jesus is God's good news to humankind. He initiated
the new covenant with his blood (Luke 22:20) and fulfilled the covenants in the Old
Testament. In the new covenant, Jesus mediates between God and humanity; forgiveness of
sins is offered once and for all. Salvation and blessings are extended to everyone; the way is
opened for people to truly love God and neighbor (Jeremiah 31:31-34; Hebrews 9:8-15).*
148 | CHAPTER 10
FOUNDATIONS 5


<!-- page-2 -->

While he was on Earth, Jesus accomplished our redemption, the central event of
the biblical metanarrative. He began his public ministry by proclaiming, "The time is
fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is at hand" (Mark 1:15). Then he died on the cross,
with the charge against him written above his head, "This is Jesus, the King of the Jews"
(Matthew 27:37). But the story did not end there. Jesus arose. His followers proclaimed
that he was "the first to rise from the dead" (Acts 26:23), previewing
the resurrection of all believers. He ascended into heaven, and now we
& church: the
followers of Christ in
all places and times
wait for his return.
The return of Christ will lead to the full consummation of the
kingdom of God. The word consummation refers to the idea of
something being finalized or completed. The kingdom of God that
T
Jesus had announced is already here, but it has not yet fully arrived.
Jesus is King of the world and its rightful Ruler right now, but not
everyone recognizes or acknowledges this. Our world is still plagued
by evil, death, and broken relationships. When Jesus returns, he will
banish sin and death once and for all (1 Corinthians 15:24-28); he will
make all things new (Revelation 21:5); everyone will acknowledge that
Jesus is Lord (Romans 14:11); and the kingdom will finally be realized.?
For the last 2,000 years, Christians have been living in an in-
between time, awaiting Jesus' return. The early Christians faced great
questions and challenges about how to follow Jesus, many of which
we still wrestle with today. How were they to live in light of Jesus'
resurrection? How was God going to work through them to accomplish
his work in the world? These questions and many more are addressed in
the remainder of the New Testament, beginning with the book of Acts.
In this chapter we will look at what happened immediately after Jesus' ascension. We'll
discover the creation of the church and its God-given mission to be an agent of restoration
in the world. We'll explore how the reality of Jesus-as-King over all creation truly changes
everything. Finally, we will learn about the part that we have to play in God's great story
as we live in this already-but-not-yet time. Let's start with how God begins his restoration
through the mission of the church.
2.A New Community: The Church
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to describe the relationship between the church,
the Great Commission, and Pentecost.
In Matthew 16:18, Jesus promised, "I will build my church." Church includes the followers
of Christ in all places and times. The word church is translated from the Greek ekklesia, a
compound word from ek, meaning out from, and kaleo, meaning to call. The church is a
group of people called out for a special purpose. Though in Matthew 16:18 the words my
church refer to all Christians everywhere, the word church is also used to refer to smaller
groups of Christians (such as congregations, denominations, and traditions) as well as to
the buildings where such people meet.
150 | CHAPTER 11
The church is not called to isolation from the
world. Instead, the church is tasked with the mission
that Jesus gave the apostles before he left Earth.
This mission is known as the Great Commission,
which is Jesus' command to make disciples, baptize,
and instruct people about all be taught. Jesus told the
apostles to spread the good news of the gospel by
• Great Commission:
Jesus' command to make
disciples, baptize, and instruct
people about all he taught
making disciples in every nation, baptizing them
in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Spirit, and teaching people to obey his commands
(Matthew 28:18-20).
Jesus promised the apostles that he would send
the Holy Spirit to indwell and empower them for this mission (John 15:26-27, Acts
1:4-5). The day the promised Holy Spirit filled the disciples took place on the Jewish Feast
of Weeks, or Pentecost, which was celebrated seven weeks, or fifty days, after Passover.
Pentecost is from the Greek word for fifty, pentekostos.
When the apostles, Jesus' mother, and many more men and women who followed
Christ were gathered on the day of Pentecost, the Holy Spirit arrived with the sound of
wind and appeared as flames of fire on each person. All were filled with the Spirit and
spoke in tongues (Joel 2:28-29; Acts 1:14-15,
2:1-4). Peter got up and preached about Jesus,
urging people to repent and receive God's
o Pentecost:
the day the promised
Holy Spirit filled the
disciples
forgiveness, and 3,000 people accepted the
gospel message that day (Acts 2:14-41).
Acts 2:42-47 and 4:32-37 describe the
character of these early Christians. They were
dedicated to the teaching of the apostles. They
regularly got together in one another's homes
to share meals and pray. Many still went to the
temple. They also shared their possessions, some
even selling their goods and distributing the
proceeds to anyone who was in need. They also
had a good reputation among their neighbors.
These small communities of Christians (the
church) were a testimony to the transformative
power of the gospel.
The New Testament uses many metaphors and similes to describe the church, such as
bride, army, nation, family, team, temple, Hock, and hospital. Many of these metaphors
come from Old Testament descriptions of Israel. Peter described the church's mission, in
light of Israel's history, this way:
But you are a chosen race, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a people for his own
possession, that you may proclaim the excellencies of him who called you our of
darkness into his marvelous light. -1 Peter 2:9
9 Act 5: Restoration Initiated- The Church
CHAPTER 11 | 151


<!-- page-3 -->

Stoning of
Stephen, by
Juan Ribero
de Rada,
St. Stephen
Convent,
Spain
152 | CHAPTER 11
The church consists of those who have been called together by the Holy Spirit
from every tribe, language, people, and nation (Revelation 5:9) and it is tasked with
proclaiming the good news about God's kingdom. Living faithfully in obedience to Jesus
and loving one another, the church is God's witness in the world that redemption and
restoration are possible.
3. Challenges and Growth
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to relate how the early church grew despite the
challenges it faced.
Despite the early success of the apostles in Judea, it was not long before they and other
followers of Jesus began to experience persecution at the hands of Jewish leaders. Acts
4:1-2 describes how the priests and Sadducees were "greatly annoyed" that the apostles
were preaching about Jesus. These leaders thought that
Jesus death would silence his followers, but here they
were proclaiming that Jesus had risen from the dead.
Hoping to stop the spread of the Jesus movement, they
arrested Peter and John and put them on trial. Peter
boldly criticized them for crucifying Jesus and proclaimed
that Jesus is the only way to be saved (Acts 4:8-12).
Eventually, they were released with a warning not to
preach about Jesus. But Peter declared that they couldn't
help speaking about all they had seen and heard
(Acts 4:18-20).
Later, an early church leader named Stephen was
stoned to death for his witness (Acts 6-7). A Pharisee
named Saul witnessed this event. Shortly after, he unleashed a great persecution on
the believers in Jerusalem. Many were arrested and dragged off to prison (Acts 8:1-3).
However, Saul's reign of terror did not last long. On the way to arrest some believers in
Damascus, Saul was struck blind by a vision of the risen Christ. Within a few days he, too,
became a follower of Jesus (Acts 9). His sight was restored. He quickly became one of the
most influential leaders in the Christian movement. Eventually, he would be known as the
apostle Paul.
Jesus had said his followers would be witnesses for him "to the end of the earth" (Acts
1:8). Thanks in part to the highly developed Roman roads and the shared language of
Greek in the empire, the gospel was able to travel quickly and widely through the apostles
and the work of ordinary believers.?
As the good news about Jesus spread, new church communities sprang up all over
the Roman empire. Peter preached in and around Jerusalem (Acts 1-5), Phillip shared
the good news in Samaria (Acts 8:5), and Paul took at least three missionary journeys*
around Asia Minor between the years AD 47 and 54 to support local churches? Various
traditions say the apostles traveled all over the world preaching about Jesus. They include
stories of Thomas taking the gospel to India, Matthew evangelizing in North Africa, and
Andrew sharing the good news in Russia. Whether these stories are historically accurate is
uncertain. What we do know is that, wherever they went, believers proclaiming that "Jesus
Though the good news spread like wildfire, it quickly became apparent that following
Tesus in the Roman world would not be easy. The early Christian communities were
Fraught with various questions and problems abour how they should relate to their Jewish
neighbors and how they should live in a pagan culture. Did Gentile believers need to
be circumcised? Should Christians eat meat that had been sacrificed to idols? Could
Christians follow the sexual practices of their Roman neighbors? How should a believer's
faith impact his or her relationships? These challenges prompred several apostles and
church leaders to write to their brothers and sisters in Christ.
4. Letters to the Churches
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to discuss how the New Testament epistles
addressed concerns of the early church.
Letters of the apostles and other Christian leaders make up a large part of the New
Testament. As explained in Chapter 2, an epistle is a short letter to a community or an
individual. Of 21 epistles in the New Testament, 13 are attributed to Paul, 3 to John,
2 to Peter, 1 to James, 1 to Jude, and 1 (Hebrews) to an unknown author. These letters
instructed believers and challenged them to remain faithful to Jesus.
As we read these letters, it is important to keep in mind
that they were not written directly to us. Reading the epistles
is like reading someone else's mail. Of course, as Scripture,
these letters are for us, but we must carefully consider how
they apply to us today because they were written to specific
communities facing specific issues. For example:
Jews and Gentiles. Early on in the Christian movement,
most new Christians were Jewish, since Jesus is the
fulfillment of God's promises to Israel. But the message the
apostles proclaimed was for everyone. In Ephesians 3:1-12,
Paul says the church is the embodiment of a mystery hidden before Christ's coming:
everyone may share in God's promises. This is what God has always intended that all
people might be blessed through the family of Abraham (Genesis 12:1-3). Through Jesus,
non-Jews could be welcomed into God's family. Jews and Gentiles, slave and free, male
and female—all can be united in the body of Christ?
However, in the early church, there was some tension between Jewish Christians and
Gentile Christians. Some Jewish Christians thought that Gentile believers needed to
follow Jewish laws and customs, especially circumcision. Both Peter and Paul rejected
this view when they saw how God had poured out the Holy Spirit on Gentiles who had
received Christ (Acts 11:17-18, 15:8-9). Paul warned Gentiles against thinking that God
had abandoned Israel and chosen them instead: he emphasized that Gentiles were grafted
Paul Writes to
the Ephesians
1886 wood
engraving
CHAPTER 11 | 153


<!-- page-4 -->

154 | CHAPTER 11
into Israel, not the other way around (Romans 11). In Galatians 5:6, Paul made it clear to
everyone that circumcision doesn't count for anything, only "faith working through love."
This is not to say that Jewish laws and customs from the Old Testament do not matter.
The author of Hebrews explains that the law and priestly rituals were good but have now
been fulfilled in Christ.
Other Social Relationships. The epistles
address how believers are to behave toward
one another in family relationships (Ephesians
5:21-6:4, Colossians 3:18-21, 1 Peter 3:1-7),
master/slave relationships (Ephesians 6:5-9,
Colossians 3:22-4:1, Philemon,
1 Peter 2:18-25), and believers' relationship
with governing authorities (Romans 13:1-7, 1
Timothy 2:1-2, 1 Peter 2:13-17). These are
some of the most debated passages in the New
Testament and require careful interpretation and theological reflection. Less controversial
but enormously challenging are Paul and Peter's instructions to Christians about being
united and at peace?
Christian Ethics. The writers of the epistles taught that Jesus' followers should demonstrate
their commitment through action (James 1:22). Christians were to love others (1 John 4:7-
12), forgive (Ephesians 4:32), show mercy and compassion (Colossians 3:12-14), care for the
fatherless and widows (James 1:27), practice sexual integrity (1 Corinthians 6:12-20), not
take vengeance on anyone (Romans 12:19), bless their enemies (Romans 12:14), and remain
faithful while waiting for Christ's return (Jude 1:22). The Holy Spirit helps believers to live
this way (Galatians 5:22-25).
The New Testament epistles include encouragement, rebuke, warnings about false
teachings, instructions about worship, and more. Together, they have shaped the nature
and practice of the church for nearly 2,000 years.
5. The Church throughout History and Today
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to summarize major events in the history of the
church from the first century to the present era.
Revelation, the last New Testament book, was most likely written between AD 80 and
100. By that time, Christians were experiencing scattered persecution in the Roman
Empire; many were martyred. Yet the church continued to grow at a rapid rate. The
love that Christians showed for one another and their neighbors was very attractive to
outsiders." Christian apologists also sought to counter the critiques of pagan philosophers.
In 313, the Roman emperor Constantine ended the persecution and granted
Christianity legal status in the empire. Over the next 500 years, church leaders gathered
to discuss the faith, producing creeds that defined and preserved Christian doctrine. The
Scriptures were translated into many languages. When the Roman empire eventually
came to an end, Christian monks and nuns preserved important writings. The gospel
pread throughout Europe. The church in North Africa also thrived and produced notable
theologians, including Augustine of Hippo, until the Islamic conquest in the mid-600s
Later, war between Christian and Islamic forces led to the Crusades and eventually
contributed to division between Roman Catholic and Eastern Orthodox churches In
1054, doctrinal differences led to a major split in the Christian faich.
Back in Europe, throughout the Middle Ages, Christians led the way in education, art,
and care of the poor. But the church gradually became increasingly corrupt and entangled
with the state. Important doctrines were ignored and obscured by the pursuit of wealth
In 1517, Martin Luther unintentionally kicked off the Protestant Reformation, which
led to the recovery of the doctrine of justification and a renewed emphasis on Scripture.
As a result, many new denominations were formed: Lutherans, Reformed, Anglican,
Anabaptists, and Puritans, among others. The Bible was translated into even more
languages, allowing for greater access to Scripture than ever before.
After the exploration of the Americas began, many Europeans migrated there, including
Protestants seeking greater freedom of worship. The
freedom of religion in the United States allowed many
denominations to flourish. Two great awakenings
contributed to religious revival, renewed missionary
activity, the abolition of slavery, and the founding of
many parachurch organizations for the common good.
In the 18h and 19th centuries, Protestant
missionaries, many from the US and the UK,
traveled around the world with the gospel and
established churches in many countries. In the 20th
century, Pentecostal and evangelical movements led
to additional revival, missions, and fervor amidst
religious skepticism, persecution, and two world
wars. Today, Christianity is the largest religion on Earth," and most Christians now live
outside the West, mainly in Africa, Central and South America, and Asia. The gospel has
led to transformation, greater concern for human life, and new communities dedicated to
showing Jesus' love.
Church history is a valuable study on its own, and this extremely brief trearment of
the last 2,000 years can hardly do justice to the rich tradition that has come down to us.
If you are a Christian, you are a part of this story that began in Geness and is sil going
on today. Christians have done amazing things in the world; they have also made terrible
mistakes. Our challenge is how we can faithfully follow Jesus in our own time.
The message the church is to proclaim today is the same one the apostles preached-
the gospel of Jesus Christ, which has implications for all of life, especially our
relationships. Back in Chapter 7, we saw how the four relationships of creation were
distorted and broken by sin. In the next four sections, well explore what the church's
message of restoration means for our relationships with God, ourselves, other human
beings, and the creation.
CHAPTER 11 | 155


<!-- page-5 -->

6. Restored Relationship with God
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to articulate how sin affects humans relationship
with God and how that relationship can be restored through Christ.
God made us in his image to have a relationship with him, but sin broke that relationship
(Romans 6:23). Sin resulted in separation, shame, guilt, and death (Isaiah 59:2, Daniel
9:8, Jeremiah 14:20). It had many other consequences, too.
A critical consequence is that sin warped human beings' view of God. Some people today;
like Adam and Eve did, hide from God as a result of their sin (Genesis 3:8); they are afraid
of God. Others, copying Cain, are consumed by their own sinful thoughts and feelings,
disobey God, and become insolent and disrespectful toward him (Genesis 4:9). Some deny
God altogether (Psalm 14:1) while others put idols in his place (Jeremiah 2:11, Romans
1:25). It isn't possible to have a good relationship with someone when you cannot even see
the person clearly—when prejudice, negative feelings, and self-interest cloud your view.
While human beings broke the relationship with God, only God can restore it, which
he did through his Son: "For Christ also suffered once for sins, the righteous for the
unrighteous, that he might bring us to God, being put to death in the flesh but made alive
in the spirit" (1 Peter 3:18). This is justification-the
& justification:
state of being declared righteous before God through the
the state of being declared
work of Jesus Christ.
righteous before God through
We cannot earn our own righteousness through
the work of Jesus Christ
righteous
good works. Being declared righteous is an act of God's
grace, through faith (Ephesians 2:8-9). We are all
guilty of sin, but are offered complete pardon by the
Lord of the universe. However, we aren't just forgiven
sinners. Christ restores us to the original relationship
God had in mind. God chose us "before the
foundation of the world, that we should be holy and
blameless before him. In love he predestined us for adoption to himself as sons through
Jesus Christ, according to the purpose of his will" (Ephesians 1:4-5).
We are children being brought into the home of a Father who loves us. The apostle Paul
put it this way:
For you did not receive the spirit of slavery to fall back into fear, but you have received
the Spirit of adoption as sons, by whom we cry, "Abba! Father!" The Spirit himself bears
witness with our spirit that we are children of God, and if children, then heirs-heirs
of God and fellow heirs with Christ, provided we suffer with him in order that we may
also be glorified with him. -Romans 8:15-17
The restoration of all things, including our relationship with God, means that if we
have been reconciled to God through Christ, then we no longer have to be afraid of him,
but can draw near to him (Hebrews 10:22). Even when we sin, we can come to him,
knowing that he faithfully forgives (1 John 1:9). We can have confidence that we are his
beloved children (1 John 3:1) and that he is completely for us. This is a message of hope
156 | CHAPTER 11
hat we have been called to share with others. Through Christ, we have been reconciled
world (2 Corinthians 5:18-21).
to God, and God has given us this very same message of reconciliation to share with the
7. Restored Relationship with Self
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to explain how God restores our relationship with
ourselves and continues to transform us.
The good news does not end with our justification.
Restoration goes far beyond simply cleansing us of
our sins so we can have a relationship with God.
In addition to restoring our relationship with him,
God restores to us our relationship with ourselves.
In describing sin's impact, Paul wrote: "I do
not understand my own actions.... I have the
desire to do what is right, but not the ability to
carry it out. For I do not do the good I want, but
& sanctification:
the process of
becoming like
Jesus
the evil I do not want is what I keep on doing"
(Romans 7:15, 18). All of us experience this
tension of knowing what is good, but choosing to do wrong.
But God did not leave Paul, nor does he leave us, to simply struggle and feel wretched.
Those who are in Christ Jesus are set free from sin's power (Romans 8:2). We no longer
have to be alienated from ourselves, not understanding why we do the things we do. We
can trust God, knowing that he is working to transform us and to give us the will and the
ability that we need to live holy lives through the power of the Holy Spirir.
However, sanctification—the process of becoming like Jesus-takes time. Even though
we received salvation immediately upon professing faith in Christ (Romans 10:9),
Scripture says we are also being saved (1 Corinthians 1:18, Philippians 2:12-13) and
looking forward to salvation (1 Peter 1:3-5). I's the already-but-not-yet nature of the
kingdom of God once again.
The Christian life is one of continual growth. One author put it this way:
Initial sanctification occurs instantly at the moment of salvation when we are delivered
from the kingdom of darkness and brought into the Kingdom of Christ (Colossians 1:13).
Progressive sanctification continues over time until we go to be with the Lord. [Te) is
implied throughout the New Testament epistles in all those instances where we are
exhorted to grow, to change, to put off the deeds of the old man and pur on godlike
character, and so on.!?
Sanctification is not easy. Letting go of destructive attitudes and habits is a daily
challenge (Luke 9:23). Growth comes with growing pains (Hebrews 12:11). But the
Process is worth it! Jesus said that he came so that we might experience true life,
abundance, Love, and joy (John 10:10, 15:10-11). In Jesus, we are freed from the power of
sin to be truly human. As one author put it:
CHAPTER 11 | 157
g Act 5: Restoration Initiated-The Church


<!-- page-6 -->

The Incarnation takes all that properly belongs to our humanity and delivers it back
to us, redeemed. All of our inclinations and appetites and capacities and yearnings
and proclivities are purified and gathered up and glorified by Christ. He did not
come to thin out human life; he came to set it free. All the dancing and feasting and
processing and singing and building and sculpting and baking and merrymaking that
belong to us, and that were stolen away into the service of false gods, are returned to
us in the Gospel.!3
Sanctification is not something we achieve on our own. We are encouraged to cooperate
as the Holy Spirit works to bring restoration within us (Romans 8:12-14, Galatians 5:16).
As we are restored to being who God created us to be, we can have a life of righteousness
and peace and joy now, while anticipating even greater blessings in the future.
8. Restored Relationship with Others
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to describe how Christ's redemption provides the
opportunity for restored relationship with others.
Through Christ, we have a restored relationship with God and with ourselves.
But the impact of Christ's death on the cross does not end there. Did you ever notice that
a cross has two parts? The vertical beam can represent our relationship with God; the
horizontal one, our relationships with others. People were created for relationships, and
full redemption and restoration mean that we can appreciate others and freely enjoy love,
friendship, and companionship with one another.
Jesus redeems us from sin, but most lists of sin in the Bible include far more than sins
against God (such as idolatry) or sins against oneself (such as gluttony). They list sins
against other people—sins of anger, envy, gossip, greed, sexual immorality, and more
(for example, see Matthew 15:19 or Galatians 5:19-21). God wants our relationships
to be characterized by love and other fruits of the Spirit (John 13:34, Galatians
5:22-23). Imagine restored relationships where sin is no longer an issue; where no
one lies about you or misunderstands you or hates you; where love is sincere and
people genuinely like and respect you; and where you, too, genuinely respect, like,
Love, and desire to serve others and spend time with them.
Restored relationships—with God, with ourselves, with others—are part of the
hope that we have in Christ and are assigned to witness to throughout the world
(Acts 1:8). We share the gospel, the good news that God sent his Son into the
world to reconcile all creation to himself (Colossians 1:19-20). As we have seen,
we are commissioned as ambassadors of reconciliation, encouraging every person
to be reconciled to God (2 Corinthians 5:17-20). We also encourage people
to seek reconciliation with each other (Matthew 5:9, James 3:18). In Christ,
worldly divisions no longer matter (1 Corinthians 12:12-13, Galatians 3:28,
Colossians 3:11). As God's ambassadors, we have been "entrusted with the
gospel" (1 Thessalonians 2:4). We hope, with God's help, to show ourselves
worthy of that trust.
Loving others is difficult, or impossible, without a spirit of reconciliation. Living in
the Spirit means having a spirit of forgiveness, seeking always to be reconciled to others.
158 | CHAPTER 11
Jesus laid it out plainly in Matthew 6:14: For i trave men their trespasses, you
heavenly rather will also forgive you. But it you do not forgive men their trespasses, neither
will your Father forgive your trespasses"
The Holy Spirit can give us the desire and tools
to maintain healthy relationships and to mend them
when they are strained or broken. He brings healing
and wholeness to our lives. He helps us persevere
in seeking peace (Romans 12:18). He gives us hope
for the future (Galatians 5:5) where none of our
relationships will suffer from sin. In the meantime,
we proclaim the good news of reconciliation,
looking forward to the day when there is no more
war, division, or fear (Micah 4:3-4) and "the earth
will be filled with the knowledge of the glory of the
LoRD as the waters cover the sea" (Habakkuk 2:14).
9. Restored Relationship with Creation
› OBJECTIVE: You will be able to associate how redemption has implications
beyond ourselves and extends to the restoration of all creation.
Sin affected everyone and resulted in a curse on nature; Christ's death and resurrection
brought about the hope of redemption for all people and nature. In Christ, "all things" will
be reconciled and made new (Colossians 1:20). The Scriptures describe creation as rejoicing
in God's righteous judgment (Psalm 96:10-13) and in its own restoration (Isaiah 11:6-9).
God cares about the physical world and every aspect of his creation. In God's final
judgment, the material creation will continue, having been purified by fire and re-created,
renewed, and perfected into a new heavens and Earth. People will have new, transformed
bodies in the new creation, and God's purposes for creation will be fulfilled. He will reign
supreme and we will reign with him (Daniel 7:18, Revelation 22:5).
However, we are not there yet. Through Christ's death, the price for the redemption of
creation has already been paid, but we see that there is still death and decay in the world.
Though our inner self is being renewed, our physical bodies waste away with the curse of
death (2 Corinthians 4:16). Romans 8:19-22 describes how the creation was subjected to
futility and groans under the weight of its bondage to corruption. The Holy Spirit is God's
guarantee of the salvation that is yet to come, when "what is mortal may be swallowed up
by life" (2 Corinthians 5:4-5), when all of creation will be made new and we will be given
new, incorruptible bodies. This is good news, but what does the gospel mean for creation
Some Christians worry that caring for creation is a distraction from sharing the gospel.
Others think that the material world doesn't really matter because it wil all be destroyed.
But creation is central to God's plan. Christ's salvation is not intended to annihilate
creation but to bring it to fruition. Being a good steward is a part of the gospel message
because what God has done in Jesus is good news for the whole world. Until Jesus returns,
CHAPTER 11 159


<!-- page-7 -->

we have the blessing to work to extend redemption to all facets of creation through wise
stewardship of this planet, including its creatures and its resources.
Having a restored relationship with creation means changing the way we think about
the natural world. Instead of seeing it as a tool to be used or exploited for our own
purposes, we must see creation as God's gift to us!" This begins with noticing what is
around us, pausing to see how God's glory is proclaimed in a tree or a river! It means
enjoying the creatures God has given and treating them well. It also means considering
what impact our actions in agriculture, mining, and other industries have on the
To be sure, we cannot fix the planet or make everything right, but this does not excuse
us from responsibility now. Redemption saves us for life on Earth, not from it. We must
care for Earth, where God dwells and will dwell with his people (Numbers 35:33-34, 1
Corinthians 6:19, Revelation 21:3). We must model the healing of all the relationships of
creation as we wait for Jesus' return and the final restoration of all things.
10. Conclusion
Living in between Jesus first coming and the final restoration of all things is not easy. On
the one hand, God's kingdom has broken into the world, enabling us by the power of the
Holy Spirit to become like Christ and to be the kind of people who love God and others.
On the other hand, we see broken relationships, sin,
evil, and death still running rampant. The kingdom is
already, but not yet. Jesus' work on the cross is finished.
He has defeated the powers of evil and rules the world
as its true Lord. But not everyone acknowledges Jesus
is Lord or believes his message.
That is where the church comes in. Through
preaching the message of reconciliation, the church
proclaims the good news and models the difference
that knowing Jesus makes. Empowered by the Holy
Spirit, the early Christians boldly shared their faith
in the midst of a pagan culture. The writings of the
apostles and other church leaders provided God's
Word to the church and are still relevant for us today. For the last 2,000 years, Christians
have been trying to live out and proclaim the gospel.
As we have seen, the gospel has implications for all our relationships. Jesus made it
possible for us to be justified with God and sanctified through the work of the Holy Spirit.
God's love and forgiveness transforms our relationships with him, with ourselves, and with
others. The gospel also changes the way we think about the natural world, helping us to see it
as a gift.
We have the opportunity to proclaim God's message of reconciliation and to live out;
this can only be done in community. No Christian is meant to go it alone; we are all part
of Christ's body (1 Corinthians 12:12-14). But there is no perfect church. Every church
community is composed of broken people who are awaiting full restoration. This doesn'
excuse sin, but it should cause us to be humble, recognizing the ways in which we may be
contributing to the brokenness of our own community.
Sadly, the church can sometimes be a place where people fight, disparage, or ignore one
another; where doubts, questions, and opinions are silenced; where creation is trampled;
and where Christians use the Bible and religious practices to promote their own self h
desires rather than to serve God and others. But the church can, and should, be a place
where we worship God, practice reconciliation, welcome others, and seek the welfare of
our community and, ultimately, the world. It is where we learn what it means to be an
ambassador for Christ first by being an ambassador of forgiveness to the person sitting next
to us. Ultimately, the church's greatest witness is the way that believers love one another
"By this all people will know that you are my disciples, if you have love for one another"
(John 13:35).
We have come a long way in the metanarrative of Scripture. It has brought us to the
present day. Yet, there is still one more chapter of God's big story to come. Tha's what
we'll explore in the next chapter of this book.
ENDNOTES
'Jeremy Bouma, "What Is the New Covenant?", zondervanacademic.com, https://zondervanacademic.com/
blog/new-covenant.
'For a helpful discussion of the nature of the kingdom of God, see Robert H. Stein, The Method and Message
ofJesus' Teaching, rev. ed. (Louisville, KY: Westminster John Knox Press, 1994), 60-81.
'Craig G. Bartholomew and Michael W. Goheen, The Drama of Scripture: Finding Our Place in the Biblical
Story (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2004), 180.
*Paul's first journey is chronicled in Acts 13-14; a second journey, in Acts 16:1-18:22; and a third, in Acts
18:23-21:14.
'Andreas J. Köstenberger, L. Scott Kellum, and Charles L. Quarles, The Cradle, the Cross, and the Crown: An
Introduction to the New Testament (Nashville, TN: Baker Academic, 2009), 391-394.
•See discussion in Gordon D. Fee and Douglas Stuart, How to Read the Bible for All Its Worth, 4th ed. (Grand
Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2014), 57-73.
'See Romans 12:5; 1 Corinthians 10:17, 12:12-13; Galatians 3:7-8, 26-28; Colossians 3:11, and Ephesians
2:13-22.
§See Justin S. Holcomb, Know the Heretics (Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2014), 23-32.
*See Romans 12:18, 1 Corinthians 1:10, Ephesians 4:1-6, James 3:13-18, and 1 Peter 3:8-9.
1 Rodney Stark, The Rise of Christianity: A Sociologist Reconsiders History (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press, 1996), 73-94.
"Conrad Hackett and David McClendon, "Christians Remain World's Largest Religious Group, But
They Are Declining in Europe; Pew Research Center, April 5, 2017, https://w.pewresearch.org/fact-
tank/2017/04/05/christians-remain-vorlds-largest-religious-group-but-they-are-declining.in-europel/.
"Terry Bridges, Transforming Grace (Colorado Springs, CO: NavPress, 2008, 123-124.
i Thomas Howard, Evangelical Is Not Enough: Warhip of God in Lurgy and Sacrament (San Francsco:
Ignatius Press, 1984), 36-37.
"See Craig M. Gay, Modern Technology and the Human Future: A Christian Appraisal (Downers Grove, IL:
Inter Varsity Press, 2018), 136-147.
*For example, see Eugene H. Petersdurexa so lays in Ten Thousand Places: A Conversation in Spiritual
Theology (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 2005), 49-129.
CHAPTER 11 | 161
160 | CHAPTER 11
FOUNDATIONS G
