# Chapter 12

<!-- page-1 (book p.12) -->

Act 6: Restoration
Accomplished
New Creation
1. Longing for Restoration
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to relate redemption through Jesus Christ to the
Christian hope of future restoration.
In the last chapter, we learned about how God works through the church to proclaim the
message of restoration. However, while the good news has been promised and proclaimed,
it has not yet been fully realized. We still confidently await the fulfillment of many of
God's great promises, trusting in him. Throughout Scripture, God is shown to be and
declares himself to be a God of restoration.
He restores my soul. -Psalm 23:3
I will restore the fortunes of my people Israel, and they shall
rebuild the ruined cities and inhabit them; they shall plant
vineyards and drink their wine, and they shall make gardens
and eat their fruit. —Amos 9:14
Return to your stronghold, O prisoners of hope; today I declare
that I will restore to you double. -Zechariah 9:12
... until the time for restoring all the things about which God
spoke by the mouth of his holy prophets long ago. - Acts 3:21
And after you have suffered a little while, the God of all grace, who has called you to
his eternal glory in Christ, will himself restore, confirm, strengthen, and establish you.
-1 Peter 5:10
Ever since Adam and Eve rebelled in the garden, sin and death have plagued the
world. In the Old Testament, God showed his faithfulness by making covenants with his
• people-saving, delivering, rescuing, forgiving, and healing them. However, sin and death
continued to corrupt and ravage the world. That's why our redemption required that Jesus,
"who knew no sin," die and rise again "so that in him we might become the righteousness
of God" (2 Corinthians 5:21). Redemption required Jesus' holy life, his death, and his
resurrection, which all showed God's power. Neither sin nor death will have the final say.
As one writer put it, "All will be well, and you will see it yourself, that every kind of thing
will be well."' This should give Christians great hope. Knowing that God has been faithful
in the past and that his Spirit is with us gives us confidence as we look to the future when
the new creation will finally arrive.
The full restoration of creation will involve the complete healing of the fractured
relationships that we spoke of in Chapters 6, 7, and 11 (God, self, others, creation).
However, it will not occur until death itself is fully defeated and Jesus " delivers the
kingdom to God the Father after destroying every rule
and every authority and power" (1 Corinthians 15:22-
25). Creation will then be "set free from its bondage to
corruption" (Romans 8:21) and all things will be made
new (Revelation 21:5).
In this chapter, we will look at the last act of the
biblical metanarrative-God's new creation. Naturally,
we are curious about the details of God's restored world,
and we will consider some of the passages that discuss
the new creation. However, the Bible does not provide
an in-depth analysis of what the new creation will be
like That's why approachine this conversation requires humility, since "no eve has seen,
nor ear heard, nor .... heart.... imagined —what God has prepared for those who love
him" (1 Corinthians 2:9). Let's begin with the book of Revelation.
CHAPTER 12 | 163


<!-- page-2 -->

o apocalypse:
revelation,
unveiling, or
uncovering
2. Context of the Book of Revelation
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to explain the literary and cultural context of
Revelation.
The book of Revelation is the last book of the Bible. It was written by John, who was given
a revelation about God's final restoration and the events leading up to it. Throughout
history, Christians have puzzled over the meaning of the book, unsure of how to read it.
In modern times, many have rejected the book because of its
violent imagery. The philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche abhorred
Revelation, calling it "the most rabid outburst of vindictiveness
in all recorded history."2
There is no doubt that Revelation can be difficult to decipher,
but as the final book in the Bible, it cannot be ignored. As we
saw in Chapter 4, good interpretation begins with a work's
literary and historical context. Considering the literary context,
Revelation is an apocalypse, written by a prophet and distributed
as a letter to churches in Asia Minor.
The term apocalypse comes from a Greek word meaning
revelation, unveiling, or uncovering. Apocalyptic literature is
literature that conveys meaning through symbols and metaphors
to reveal reality and encourage God's people. In apocalypses,
someone generally sees a vision of an otherworldly realm. That
vision reveals the true nature of reality. Apocalypses often
include descriptions of judgment and God's eventual victory.
One author says that apocalyptic literature's function is "to
sustain the people of God, especially in times of crisis."4
Revelation contains many similarities to the writings of the Old Testament prophets.
In fact, Revelation claims to be a prophecy (Revelation 1:3) and John draws heavily
on prophetic books like Ezekiel, Isaiah, and Daniel. Recall from Chapter 8 that
though prophets do sometimes predict the future, they most often call God's people to
faithfulness and obedience. If you pay close attention, you will see many such calls to
faithfulness in the book of Revelation (for example, Revelation 2:10, 13:10, and 14:12).
Revelation 2-3 consists of seven letters written to churches in Asia Minor. These letters
provide encouragement and rebuke to specific churches, but they are also addressed to the
church at large. The entire book is a letter of encouragement to the church, challenging
Christians to remain faithful to Jesus.
Other elements of literary interest include John's use of common folk tales to illustrate
the gospel (for example, Revelation 12); intentional contrasts between the Lamb and the
dragon, Babylon and Jerusalem, and others; and the symbolic use of colors (white for
victory, black for death, gold for beauty) and numbers (three for a particular group, four
for the world, seven for perfection, twelve for the whole people of God, and so on?
In considering the historical context, we must remember that John was living in the
pagan Roman culture. Roman emperors were seen as divine. Many citizens worshipped
hem to gain their favor and the economic benefits that came with it Many of the ciri
to which John addressed Revelation included great shrines to the emperor. Rome was
happy to tolerate other gods so long as one worshipped the emperor, bur Christians' refusal
to worship Caesar caused them to be seen as outsiders and potential threats to Rome's
social unity? Christians in John's day likely experienced sporadic persecution. Revelation
frequently mentions martyrs and includes a possible reference to Nero, an emperor know
For his cruelty to Christians. Thus, in the Roman world, followers of Jesus would have
experienced enormous pressure to conform to societal norms by worshipping the emperor
and participating in pagan religious festivals.
3. Worshipping God, Following the Lamh
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to describe the relevance of the Lamb in the book
of Revelation.
› OBJECTIVE: You will be able to articulate the role of suffering in the Christian
life.
In Revelation, John was shown a vision of restoration and many things that will happen
before God's new creation arrives. He also gave his readers a message of hope, challenge,
and warning.
The central images in the book of Revelation are God on the throne and the
slaughtered Lamb. In Revelation 4-5, John is caught up to heaven (similar episodes occur
in Isaiah 6 and Ezekiel 1). He views God's throne and his awesome power and glory.
"Flashes of lightning, and rumblings, and peals of thunder" (Revelation 4:5) come from
God's throne, reminding us of God's presence at Mount Sinai (Exodus 19:16). Before
God's throne are seven flaming torches that represent God's perfection. Around God's
throne are twenty-four elders and four strange beasts who cry out, "Holy, holy, holy is the
Lord God Almighty, who was and is and is to come!" (Revelation 4:8).
NRI:
Then, a sealed scroll is brought out. The scroll represents God's plan for establishing his
kingdom on Earth? but sadly, there is no one who is worthy to open it. However, one of
the elders tells John, "Behold, the Lion of the tribe of Judah, the Root of David" is worthy to
open the scroll (Revelation 5:5). However, what John sees is not a lion, but a Lamb that has
been slaughtered. This is a clear reference to Jesus and his crucifixion. Jesus is the Lamb of
Lamb of God
mosaic, Saints
Peter and Paul
Basilica, Prague,
Czech Republic
CHAPTER 12 | 165
164 | CHAPTER 12


<!-- page-3 (book p.166) -->

1 CHAPTER 12
God, the Messiah, the true Davidic Ruler who has conquered; but he has not conquered
with a sword. Instead, he conquered by his righteous life, death, and resurrection. Jesus'
atoning sacrifice is the way in which he defeated sin and death.
Christians living at the time were constantly told that Caesar was lord, the king of the
world. Rome maintained its power through violence and coercion. John's vision, however,
pulls back the curtain to reveal what is actually true—God is on the throne as the true Ruler
of the universe. Unlike Rome, God does not rule through violence, but through sacrifice!
John challenges his readers to follow the Lamb through suffering. He describes a great
multitude of followers of the Lamb who have "washed their robes... in the blood of
the Lamb" (Revelation 7:9-17). These
believers have endured suffering and
persecution for the sake of Jesus. They
"follow the Lamb wherever he goes"
(Revelation 14:4) even if that means
death. Many Christians in the first
century faced persecution and martyrdom
at the hands of the Roman empire. What
John offers them is a challenge and a
promise. The challenge is to remain
faithful to Jesus through suffering. The
promise is that they will be vindicated,
and their place is secure in God's coming
kingdom.
Suffering is part and parcel of the Christian life. The way of the Lamb is the way of the
cross (Luke 9:23). Those who follow the Lamb must follow him wherever he goes. We can
do this knowing that God and the Lamb will rule the new creation (Revelation 22:1, 3).
The key question of Revelation is "Whom do we worship?"!! In other words, who really
rules the world? Who deserves our allegiance? Is it God or Rome? God or the nation in
which we live?
4. Judgment
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to defend the Christian view of God's final
judgment.
We have seen the message of hope and the challenge that John gives his readers. We must
now turn to John's warning. The book of Revelation is famous for its intense scenes of
violence and judgment. Four horsemen of the apocalypse ride over the earth bringing
death and destruction; stars fall from the sky; the moon turns to blood; huge locusts
terrorize those who are in opposition to God; a great dragon seeks to thwart God's plan of
redemption; and two beasts make war on God's people.
Some see the judgments in Revelation as literal events reserved for a future time when
God will pour out his wrath on the earth. Others see the judgments as symbolic, and part
of the normal experience of life in the world as God gives people over to the consequences
of their evil actions. Either way, the question is, how does violent judgment square with
the image of the slaughtered Lamb in Revelation 5?
To begin with, note that at least some of the judgments described in the book of
Revelation are not God striking people down as much as they are people experiencing the
consequences of their actions or those of evil empires. As one biblical scholar put it:
The judgment of the world originates in its failure to believe and be faithful to...
God. When it creates its own deities, it suffers the natural consequences of deifying
the non-divine. In this sense, judgment proceeds from the throne of God and from the
Lamb (Revelation 6:16-17) because the rejection of the divine gift of life carries with it
inherent deadly consequences!
Ultimately, humans are dependent on God. He offers us life, but when we reject
that life, we will inevitably experience the disastrous consequences. In Revelation 6,
four horsemen ride over the earth, bringing war, famine, plague, and death. All of
these are experienced in the world today, partly through
human agency, including oppression, greed, and lack of
ethical responsibility. Christians endure these trials like
anyone else, but the difference is this: Christians will not
be eternally lost. God does not promise to keep us from
suffering (John 16:33), but he does promise that those
who love him will always experience his nearness and
that nothing will separate us from his love (Romans 8,
Revelation 2-3).
The second thing to note is that judgment is not about
God getting revenge on people he doesn't like. Rather, it
is about God bringing justice on evil. God will not let evil
run rampant forever. Revelation 11:18 declares judgment
will come on those who have been destroying God's world.
The city of Babylon is an important symbol in Revelation. It
stands for Rome and its empire, which was then persecuting
believers, and also for all evil empires who align themselves
against God. Babylon was a city of immorality, economic
exploitation, and greed. It trafficked in luxury items and
also in slaves (Revelation 18:13). These and other sins are
what God is coming to judge.
Finally, the judgments prepare the way for God's new creation to be revealed. In
order for humans to flourish there, the forces of evil must be eliminated once and for all.
Only God can do this. John did not summon his readers to take up arms against their
oppressors in the Roman empire. Instead, Christians win the victory by bearing faichful
Witness to the Lamb and following his example (Revelation 12:11). However, if we reject
God and align ourselves with evil, we will experience judgment.
Four Horsemen
of the
Apocalypse,
illustration by
German painter
and printmaker
Albrecht Durer,
CHAPTER 12 | 167


<!-- page-4 -->

168 | CHAPTER 12
5. Hell
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to clarify the truth about hell.
Discussion of God's judgment inevitably raises the question of hell. What is hell? Hell is
a place where all who reject Christ spend eternity excluded from God's presence. It is a place
prepared for Satan's judgment (Matthew 25:41) and for those who reject God (Revelation
21:8). The Bible describes hell as a "fery furnace" where people weep and gnash their
teeth, suffer, and experience regret and torment (Matthew 13:50, Luke 16:19-31). After
God has consigned the devil to hell for eternity, those who are not found in the Lamb's
book of life are cast into the lake of fire (Revelation 20:7-15).
Taken literally, the biblical images cause people to think of hell as a burning fire where
the devil and his angels torture those who haven't trusted Jesus. However, considering the
context of these passages, some of the imagery may be symbolic. This does not mean that
hell is not a real place or somehow less horrible. As one scholar put it:
The thing symbolized is not less horrible than the symbols, but more. Spiritual fire
is worse than material fire; spiritual death is worse than physical death. The pain of
loss—the loss of God, who is the source of all joy—is infinitely more horrible than any
torture could ever be.!4
The main idea to get about hell is this: to be in hell is to be outside, away from the
presence of God, excluded from God's new creation. Ultimately, hell is more than just
a place. As pastor Tim Keller wrote, "Hell ... is the trajectory of a soul, living a self-
absorbed, self-centered life, going on and on forever."5
It is common for people to think in terms of God sending people to hell. However,
it may be that hell is more like God finally allowing people to experience eternity apart
from him if that is what they truly want.! Hell is, in a sense, a place that people choose.
That may sound odd, but consider this: If
people want nothing to do with God in this
life, is it likely that they will want to spend an
eternity with him? Will God force those who
& hell:
a place where all
who reject Christ
spend eternity
excluded from God's
presence
reject him to live with him forever? Part of the
dignity that God gives human beings is the
ability to choose.
God has no desire for anyone to live outside
of his presence. That's why his judgment is
counterbalanced with patience. God is not
quick to judge sinners. Instead, he is patient,
longing for all people to come to repentance
and faith (2 Peter 3:9). However, we do not have infinite time, and if we persist in turning
away from God, we will find ourselves eternally outside. C. S. Lewis said it this way:
"There are only two kinds of people in the end: those who say to God, "Thy will be done,
and those to whom God says, in the end, "Thy will be done? "17
Whether or not the images of fire and brimstone are literal, one thing is certain: hell is
a place of great anguish and regret (Matthew 18:8, 25:41). If we want nothing to do with
God, we may get what we want, but there will be no satisfaction in it. God is the Source
fife. love, and joy. To be separated from him for all eternity will be the greatest possible
loss. In the end, hell is an eternal turning away from God and the true life that he offers
6. Heaven
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to discuss the eternal
destiny of Christians.
Many Christians have the impression that their eternal destiny
is "up there" in the clouds somewhere. Perhaps you have heard
about being "so heavenly minded that you are no earthly
good." This complaint has commonly been lodged against
Christians who believe that our only business on earth is to
share the plan of salvation with people so they too can get
to heaven. Everything else, including our daily work, social
• heaven:
the place
Where God
dwells and
IS eternally
worshipped
causes, and creation are too often neglected. Of course, sharing
the plan of salvation with others is essential. Yet as we saw in
the last chapter, the message of the gospel is much bigger than
individual salvation. It is good news for all creation, and it
makes some restoration possible beginning now.
The biblical metanarrative is not solely about people getting
saved so they can go to heaven after they die. Rather, the great
story reaches its fulfillment in God's new creation! According
to Revelation 21-22, we do not go to God at the end of all things. Rather, God comes
to dwell among us. What has traditionally been called "heaven," then, is not our final
destination. So, if heaven is not our final destination, what is it?
The Bible describes heaven as the place God where dwells and is eternally worshipped.
After Jesus rose from the dead, he ascended to heaven, where he now sits at God's right
hand (Mark 16:19). Revelation 4-5 reveals the endless worship of God and the Lamb that
occurs in heaven. When we pray, "Your kingdom come, your will be done, on earth as it
is in heaven" (Matthew 6:10), we are praying for the reality of heaven to be the reality on
earth. Christians long for the day when everyone will give their worship and allegiance to
the only One who is worthy.
But isn't it true that believers who die go to heaven? Yes. Until the restoration of all
things, heaven is the place where believers who have died are present with Jesus. Revelation
teaches that those who die in the Lord are present with him (Revelation 7:13-15, 14:13).
In Philippians 1:23, Paul describes how he is torn between his desire to continue serving
God in his mortal body and dying so he can "be wich Christ, for that is far better." Yet,
Paul "sees (heaven] as only a temporary stare of affairs, an interim condition until Christ
•.. return s] " When that happens, believers will be given new bodies that will no longer
experience decay and death (1 Corinthians 15:35-58). We do not know what kind of body
believers have in heaven between now and then. What we do know is that they are there,
safe and secure in God's care.?°
CHAPTER 12 | 169


<!-- page-5 -->

When the gospel writers used phrases like "the kingdom of God" or "the kingdom of
heaven," they were talking about God's righteous rule over all creation. Our hope is not
just that we will be in God's presence when we die, but that one day, God's kingdom will
be fully established in the new heaven and the new earth (Revelation 21:1). The Holy Spirit
in our hearts is the guarantee of God's promises about our future (2 Corinthians 1:22, 5:5;
Ephesians 1:14) We do know we will be given new bodies to rule and reign with God for all
eternity. This will be the final restoration of all things.
7. The Second Coming
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to explain the
& second coming:
Jesus personal and visible
return from heaven to Earth
significance of the second coming and what
Christians should do while awaiting Christ's
return.
The event that triggers the final restoration of
creation is the return of Jesus Christ to Earth.
Jesus told his disciples he would return at an
unknown time in the future with great power and
glory (Matthew 16:27, Mark 8:38, Luke 9:26). At
the Last Supper, Jesus reaffirmed to the apostles
that he would come again, and that in the meantime, he would send the Spirit (John
14:1-3,16:7. He also told them about his death and resurrection many times, but they
did not understand him until they saw him alive after his resurrection.
After his ascension from the Mount of Olives, an angel confirmed that Jesus would
return:
"Men of Galilee, why do you stand looking into heaven? This Jesus, who was taken up
from you into heaven, will come in the same way as you saw him go into heaven."
The return of Jesus was the steadfast hope of the early church, and it continues to be
the hope of believers today. Jesus' personal and visible return from heaven to Earth is known
as the second coming.
Jesus taught that his return would come at a time no one would expect. He said his
return would be like that of a thief in the night, a master away on business, or a delayed
bridegroom (Matthew 24:30-31, 42-44, 45-50, 25:1-13).21
Paul wrote about Jesus' second coming, urging the Thessalonian believers to
"encourage one another" while they waited for the Lord (1 Thessalonians 4:16-18). Peter,
similarly, urged those he addressed as "beloved" to live "in holiness and godliness, waiting
for and hastening the coming of the day of God," recognizing that the Lord wants people
to repent and be saved (2 Peter 3:9-14).
Jesus' second coming will be good news for his church. Believers-both those still
living and those who have already died-are called the bride of Christ and invited to the
"marriage supper of the lamb" (Revelation 19:6-10). They will rule with him throughout
eternity. However, the second coming will be bad news for those who reject Christ and
persist in evil. John describes Jesus as returning on a white horse to bring final judgment.
He will return as "King of kings and Lord of lords" (Revelation 19:11-21) and everyone
will acknowledge that Jesus is Lord (Philippians 2:10-11). The last verse in the Bible
affirms the promise of his return: "He who testifies to these things says, 'Surely I am
coming soon? Amen. Come, Lord Jesus!" (Revelation 22:20).
What then, are we to do as we wait for Christ's return? Throughout history, believers
have waited in different ways. Some people, expecting the return of Jesus to happen in their
lifetimes, have quit their jobs and gotten rid of all possessions. Others have constructed
elaborate timelines or even predicted the exact date of Jesus return. Still orhers have acted as
if the urgency of sharing the gospel justifies their neglect of other God-given responsibilities.
But none of these reactions is suggested by the Bible. Instead, the writers of the Bible
urge us to remain faithful, share the good news that Jesus is King, preach the message of
reconciliation, and work for the healing and restoration of this world as much as we can. We
wait for Jesus return not by speculating about when it will occur, but by living faichfully in
obedience to Jesus every day, empowered by the Holy Spirit (Galatians 5:5, Tirus 2:11-14,
1 John 2:28).
8. From the Garden to the City
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to compare and contrast the new creation
described in Revelation with the first creation in Genesis.
Besides promising Jesus' return, Revelation describes the coming of a city, "the New
Jerusalem," that comes down from heaven (Revelation 21:1-2). The city is pictured as a
giant cube, which doesn't refer to its actual dimensions, but rather to the city's perfection
(Revelation 21:16). Its cubic shape also resembles the holy of holies, signifying that it
will be a place where God is personally present to his people. It is a city where God and
humans will dwell together in harmony, with humans using their God-given abilities to
In God's new creation, described in Revelation 21-22, the garden and the city come
together.23 We cannot fully comprehend the new creation, but there are remarkable
parallels between the Bible's first three and last three chapters.
As you can see from the chart on the next page (figure 12.a), the new creation will not
simply be a return to Eden. The new creation will be a restoration of God's creation which
was marred by the fall; it will be a reconciliation between God and all creation; and it
will also be a more beautiful, gloriously new world where humans and creation can live in
freedom with God. (Acts 3:20-21, Colossians 1:15-20, Romans 8:18-23). Death will be
destroyed (1 Corinthians 15:26). Humans will have new, perfected bodies (1 Corinthians
15:22, 35-55). Harmony will be restored between animals, people, and God (Isaiah 65:25).
The new earth will be characterized by God's intimate presence wich humankind and with
his creation. This state will persist into eternity (2 Peter 3:10-13)24
CHAPTER 12 | 171
170 | CHAPTER 12


<!-- page-6 -->

Genesis 1-3
"In the beginning, God created the heavens
and the earth." (Gen. 1:1)
"The darkness he called Night."
(Gen. 1:5)
"God made two great lights." (The sun
and the moon, Gen. 1:16)
"In the day that you eat from it,
you shall surely die." (Gen. 2:17)
Satan appears as the deceiver of humankind.
(Gen. 3:1) (
Humans are given a garden, into which
defilement entered. (Gen. 3:6-7)
Human fellowship with God is disrupted.
(Gen. 3:8-10)
The serpent initially triumphs.
(Gen. 3:13)
"I will surely multiply your pain."
(Gen. 3:16)
"Cursed is the ground because of you."
(Gen. 3:17)
Sin, death, and suffering enter the world through
the fall of the first man, Adam. (Gen. 3:17-19)
The first paradise is closed.
Gen. 3:23)
Access to the tree of life is cut off in Adam.
(Gen. 3:24)
Humans were driven from God's presence.
(Gen. 3:24)
Revelation 20-22
"I saw a new heaven and a new earth."
(Rev. 21:1)
"There will be no night there."
(Rev. 21:25)
"The city has no need of sun or moon."
(Rev. 21:23)
There will be no more death or sorrow.
(Rev. 21:4)
Satan is sent away forever.
(Rev. 20:10)
Redeemed humans are given a city, where
nothing that defiles will ever enter. (Rev. 21:10, 27)
Human fellowship with God is fully restored.
(Rev. 21:3)
The Lamb ultimately triumphs.
(Rev. 20:10; 22:3)
There will be no more pain.
(Rev. 21:4)
There will be no more curse on the earth.
(Rev. 22:3)
Sin, death, and suffering are ended in the
rule of the second Adam, Christ. (Rev. 21:6)
The new paradise is opened.
(Rev. 21:25)
Access to the tree of life is reinstated in Christ.
(Rev. 22:14)
"They will see his face."
(Rev. 22:4)
figure 12.a
9. All Things New
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to articulate details of the New Jerusalem.
In Revelation 21:5, God declares, "Behold, I am making all things new." This promise
echoes what God told Isaiah (Isaiah 65:17-19). God's new creation will be greater than
anything we could possibly imagine. That's why Scripture uses vivid word pictures to
In the New Jerusalem, God will be fully present with his people without any physical
walls or barriers. In the past, use of the inner court of the temple had been limited to
Jewish men; only priests entered the sanctuary; and only the high priest could go into
the holy of holies. In the New Jerusalem, the temple will be open to all. It will not be a
physical structure; rather, the temple will be "the Lord God the Almighty and the Lamb"
(Revelation 21:22). To be clear, God never abandoned his people; however, ever since the
fall in Genesis 3, sin has come between God and humans. In the New Jerusalem, that
barrier will be totally removed and we will Alourish in God's presence.
The New Jerusalem is open to all followers of the Lamb. In the new creation, there will
be open and unlimited access to God. People from every tribe, nation, and tongue will be
there (Revelation 5:9, 21:24; Zechariah 2:11). There will be no more prejudice or division
had language, or culture. All will worship together in peace. Access to the tree
of life will no longer be restricted; instead, the tree will be right in the middle of the city.
and its leaves will be "for the healing of all nations" (Revelation 222).
In the New Jerusalem, God will wipe away all tears, " death shall be no more, neither
shall there be mourning, nor crying, nor pain anymore" (Revelation 214). We will no
longer be plagued by sinful desires, broken relationships, pain, or death (Isaiah 25:8). We
will live without fear, knowing that nothing evil will ever enter there (Revelation 21:27).
Satan and his minions will be banished and will never again wreak havoc in God's world
(Revelation 20:10). There will be no more struggle, no more war, no more curse. People
will turn their weapons into gardening tools (Isaiah 2:4).
The city will also be beautiful. The New
Jerusalem has streets of gold (Revelation
21:21), the walls are covered with precious
stones (Revelation 21:18-20), a river runs
through the city, and the tree of life bears
much fruit (Revelation 22:2). There will be
no more night there, because God will be
"Behold, I am
making all
things new.
the light (Revelation 21:23). It will be more
breathtaking than we can possibly imagine
(Isaiah 65:17-19).
The city will be a place where God
is worshipped and humans flourish. We
will be praising God throughout eternity.
This does not just mean singing in a choir
(though one can definitely imagine beautiful songs of worship being sung there). Fully
"transformed into [the Lord's] image with ever-increasing glory" (2 Corinthians 3:18),
we will rule and reign with God, stewarding the world, using our creativity to its fullest
extent, developing what God has given us, and bringing abundance out of what he has
made. With bodies that no longer decay, we will experience life as it was meant to be lived
in God's presence.
We look forward to all this because Jesus has won the victory over sin and death. We
do not know when God's new creation will arrive, but Revelation encourages us to be
ready: "He who testifies to these things says, Surely I am coming soon? Amen. Come,
Lord Jesus!" (Revelation 22:20)
CHAPTER 12 | 173
172 | CHAPTER 12
FOUNDATIONS G


<!-- page-7 -->

10. Conclusion
In the last seven chapters, we have explored the grand metanarrative of Scripture. It is a
story about God's good creation, how sin alienated us from God and corrupted creation,
how God chose a people to be a blessing to the earth, how Jesus died and rose again to
redeem sinful humanity, how the Holy Spirit empowers the church to share the gospel,
and how one day, God will make all things new.
What makes the Bible's metanarrative unique? After all,
as we saw in Chapter 5, there are many stories or worldviews
on offer in the world today—such as secularism, new
spirituality, and postmodernism, to name just a few. Each of
these worldviews claims to tell the true story of the world and
gives answers to life's biggest questions; however, the story of
Scripture stands apart. In his book A Walk Through the Bible,
British theologian Lesslie Newbigin explained why the biblical
metanarrative is so special.2
Some worldviews, Newbigin said, invite us into something
larger than ourselves. They say our lives will be meaningful if
we contribute "to some historical project of civilization which
in the end will lead to a perfect society in the future."26 But
you and I will not get to share in the future utopia. We will be long gone before it arrives.
Instead of building for a future in which we will not share, many seek meaning in
personal fulfillment—through power, money, or fame. In this way of thinking, the
world as a whole does not matter and there is no metanarrative that can make sense of
everything: there is only me and my story.
Newbigin pointed out that the biblical metanarrative, by contrast, calls us out of
selfish individualism. It encourages us to work for God's kingdom, culminating in the
new creation in which all believers will share. We have been invited into God's story. We
labor with him and with one another, which provides meaning for our individual stories
and gives us community. The Bible's vision, said Newbigin, "enables us to see the whole
human story and each of our lives within that story as meaningful... [It] therefore invites
us through Jesus Christ to become responsible actors in history."2]
In other words, we have a place in the biblical metanarrative today: the "filming" is
still taking place; we are actors on the set as the story resolves. We can exercise our gifts,
talents, and passions for God's glory and in the service of others, as we anticipate the full
restoration of God's kingdom on Earth.
In the last seven chapters, we have only briefly surveyed the metanarrative of Scripture.
It makes sense of the grand sweep of history, explains our place in the world, and invites
us to participate in God's mission. However, there are many details we did not have space
to discuss. You can't do any better than to go and read the Bible for yourself. As you do,
you may just find yourself caught up in God's great story. In the next few chapters, we'll
take a deeper dive into Scripture as we consider the nature of God and humans.
ENDNOTES
Talian. Julian of Norwich: Showings, trans. Edmund Colledge, and James Walsh Mahwah. NI: Paulist
Press, 1978), 305.
Fried in Netsche, as quoted in Michael J. Gorman, Reading Revelation Responsibly. Uncivil Worship and
Witness Following the Lamb into the New Creation (Eugene, OR: Cascade Books, 2011, 2.
• Mitchell G. Reddish, "The Genre of the Book of Revelation, in The Oxford Handbook of the Book of
Revelation, ed. by Craig R. Koester (Oxford: Oxford University Pres, 2020), 21-35.
Gorman, Reading Revelation Responsibly, 15.
Gorman, Reading Revelation Responsibly, 17-19.
6N. T. Wright, Revelation for Everyone (Louisville, KY: Westminster John Knox Press, 011, 10-41.
"For a thorough treatment of how Romans viewed Christians, see Robert Louis Wilken, The Chrisians as the
Romans Saw Them (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1984) See also Larry W. Hurtado, Detroyer of
the Gods: Christian Distinctiveness in the Roman World (Waco, TX: Baylor University Press, 2016, 52-62.
sPaul Spilsbury, The Throne, the Lamb, e the Dragon: A Reader's Guide to the Book of Revelation (Downers
Grove, IL: IVP Academic, 2002), 51.
Richard Bauckham, The Theology of the Book of Revelation (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1993),
80. 10Spilsbury, The Throne, the Lamb, & the Dragon, 72.
"Spilbury, The Throne, the Lamb, & the Dragon, 51-65.
12Gorman, Reading Revelation Responsibly, 140.
13Spilsbury, The Throne, the Lamb, & the Dragon, 127-128.
14 Peter Kreeft, "Hell," Crossroads Initiative, January 15, 2021, https://www.crossroadsinitiative.com/media/
articles/hell-peter-kreeft/.
15Tim Keller, The Reason for God: Belief in an Age of Skepticism (New York: Riverhead Books, 2008), 79.
16Keller, The Reason for God: Belief in an Age of Skepticism, 78-79.
VC. S. Lewis, The Great Divorce (New York: HarperCollins, 1946), 75.
18 For a thorough treatment of this topic, see N. T. Wright, Surprised by Hope: Rethinking Heaven, the
Resurrection, and the Mission of the Church (New York, NY: Harper Collins, 2008).
19Ben Witherington III, Revelation and the End Times: Unraveling God's Message of Hope (Nashville:
Abingdon Press, 2010), 45.
20Wright, Surprised by Hope, 171-172.
"'Some scholars take these verses to refer to the destruction of the temple in AD 70 and interpret the
destruction of the temple as the vindication of Jesus. However, many proponents of this view still affirm that
Jesus will come again at the end of history, though they argue that these verses do not refer to that event. See
for example, N. T. Wright, Jesus and the Victory of God (Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 1996, 360-365.
"Craig R. Koester, "Revelation's Vision of New Jerusalem: God's Life-Giving Reign for the World," Word o-
World 40, no. 2, (Spring 2020): 115.
23 Koester, "Revelation's Vision of New Jerusalem: God's Life-Giving Reign for the World, 119.
2* Zachary Klein and Hannah Klein, "Effects of the Fall on the Physical Creation: A Biblical Analysis,"
Answers Research Journal 13, (August 12, 2020) 95-111, hteps//answersingenesis.org/sin/fects-of-the-fall-
on-the-physical-creation-a-biblical-analysis/.
3 What follows is a summary and modification of Newbiginis insights on pages 82-85 of Leslie Newbigin, A
Walk Through the Bible (Louisville, KY: Westminster John Knox Pres, 1999).
'Newbigin, A Walk Through the Bible, 82.
2Newbigin, A Walk Through the Bible, 84-85.
CHAPTER 12 | 175
174 | CHAPTER 12
