# Chapter 13

<!-- page-1 (book p.13) -->

Who God Is
1. Four Gods
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to categorize four ways in which people view God.
What do people mean when they say they believe in God? According to research shared in
the book America's Four Gods, most Americans-about 95 percent-believe in God. They
usually fall into one of four categories.
• 31 percent believe in an authoritative God who is engaged in human affairs and also
judgmental, punishing or rewarding us now.
• 24 percent belleve in a benevolent God who Is engaged and nonjudgmental, rescuin
or providing alternatives in crises.
• 10 percent belleve in a cre Afreen od who is disengaged and judgmental, not interfering
in human affairs now but planning to judge us in the afterlife.
• 24 percent believe in a distant God who is disengaged and nonjudgmental!
How we view God is no small matter. Theologian A. W.
Tozer emphasized in his classic book Knowledge of the Holy that
"what comes into our minds when we think about God is the
most important thing about us. Our view of God both affects
and is affected by the way we live.
Theology is the study of God-his nature and actions and
everything that relates to him. Most of us are engaged in some
form of theological reflection on a regular basis; almost everyone
has thoughts about who God is. We can truly say that everyone
is, in this sense, a theologian. A theologian is someone who
"HEOLOGIA
thinks about God and God's relation to the world. All of us,
even atheists, think about God.
So, what does the average US Christian think about God?
According to one study:
[About] 93 percent of (US) Christians believe God loves
all people, regardless of their faults. Nearly nine-in-ten
(87 percent) say that God knows everything that happens in
the world. And about eight-in-ten (78 percent) believe God
has the power to direct or change everything that goes on in the world. In total, three-
quarters of US Christians believe that God possesses all three of these attributes-that
the Deity is loving, omniscient and omnipotent.
What are these beliefs based on, though? In this chapter we'll talk about whether we
can discover who an infinite God is. We'll then look at who God reveals himself to be and
his nature as Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.
If God "is there and he is not silent, as the philosopher and pastor Francis Schaeffer
put it, can we actually know him?
2. Can We Really Know an Infinite God?
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to conclude it is possible to know God as he
reveals himself to us in scripture.
Nearly a thousand yearsad gi •1 Benedictine monk and philosopher named Anselm of
Canterbury defined God as "that than which none greater can be conceived," adding
we must think of God as "tsnt amatest possible being, an individual exhibiting maximal
perfection."* Perfect being theology is a view that defines God as the greatest posible eing.
9 Who God Is
Window in Victoria
Legislative
Building, Victoria,
British Columbia,
Canada
CHAPTER 13 | 177


<!-- page-2 -->

#1
According to Anselm, it is impossible even to imagine a being that is greater than God.
Since God is infinite, our ability to understand him is limited and he is greater than any of
our definitions. Because we are finite, all of our thinking about God is to be characterized
by humility, with the recognition that we cannot
possibly ever have all the answers.
Some people fall into the trap of thinking that
because they cannot know everything about God,
& perfect being
theology: a view
that defines God
as the greatest
possible being
they cannot know anything about God. But that
conclusion isn't true. As one researcher phrased it,
"While we cannot know God exhaustively, we can
know him truly. The finite human mind cannot
fully comprehend the nature of an infinite God
...but we can grow in our understanding and
experience of God as he has revealed himself in
creation, Scripture, and through Jesus Christ."
The apostle Paul wrote in Romans 11:33, "Oh, the depth of the riches and wisdom and
knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his judgments and how inscrutable his ways!"
Even as we marvel at how far God is above our understanding, Scripture also assumes we
can know him truly. Jeremiah 9:23-24 says: "Let not the wise man boast in his wisdom,
let not the mighty man boast in his might, let not the rich man boast in his riches, but let
him who boasts boast in this, that he understands and knows me."
God has chosen to reveal himself in how he created the world and by giving us the
Scriptures. However, the fullest way we know God is through Jesus Christ (Hebrews
1:1-2). The Holy Spirit teaches us about Jesus (John 14:26). Not only can we know God,
but we can know him well enough to obey him and to love him (Deuteronomy 29:29,
1 John 5:3).
God reveals himself in both word and action. He wants to be known, and through the
Bible he has given us information to understand him as he wants to be understood.
3. Who God Reveals Himself to Be Part 1
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to determine that God is self-existent, personal,
spirit, and incarnate in Jesus.
We previously discussed God's transcendence (he is above and outside his creation) and
immanence (he is within and among his creation). But there is much more that we can
know about God! In this and the next two sections, we will look at a dozen more of his
1. God is self-existent. Theologians use the word aseity (from the Latin a se, "from
oneself") to describe God's self-existent and self-sufficient nature. As philosopher William
Lane Craig describes, "God doesn't just happen to exist, as if by accident. Rather God
exists by a necessity of his own nature; it is impossible for him not to exist. Moreover, God
does not depend upon any other being for his existence. God alone is self-existent, and
everything else depends on Him."
As a self-existent being, God alone can cause everything else to exist and can sustain
its existence: Everything that exists does so only because God exists first (Genesis 1:).
Job 33:4, Romans 11:36, Colossians 1:16-17). God's existence makes sense of the origin
of the universe because it makes sense of the universe's design. Design, after all, must
have a designer. Moreover, because God exists apart from nature, he can provide a
foundation for objective moral values.
2. God is spirit and incarnate in Jesus. Some people think of God as an old man in
the sky who likes to spoil his children, or as a Zeus-like figure holding a lightning bolt
waiting to strike us when we sin. But the Bible affirms that God is not a physical being.
Rather, he is pure spirit (John 4:24). He is not bound by space or time. John 1:18 affirms
that "no one has ever seen God." It also asserts that Jesus, who was God in the flesh, made
God known to us. Jesus became a human being so that we might know God. God makes
himself known to us by becoming human, like us.
This truth about God reveals two important things about the nature of reality. First, both
spirit and matter exist. The physical world is not all that exists (as materialism teaches), nor is
the world only spiritual (as pantheism teaches). Second, both the physical and the spiritual
are good and valuable, demonstrated by God's actions in revealing himself to us.
3. God is personal. For 53 percent of people
surveyed by the authors of America's Four Gods,
God is not a person but a "cosmic force, like
the force in Star Wars. However, God is a person
to be known, rather than a force to be used. The
entire Bible is the story of God interacting as a
person. It records some of his conversations with
Adam and Eve (Genesis 3:16-19), Abraham
d aseity:
God's self-
existent.
and self-
sufficient
• nature
(Genesis 17:1-22), Moses (Exodus 3), and many
others. It tells about how he delights in his people
or is disappointed by them (Deuteronomy 30:9,
Zephaniah 3:6-8). It tells about his longing for a
relationship with us (Ephesians 1:4-5, Revelation 21:3-4) and his thoughts and plans for
us (1 Corinthians 2:9). The very idea of personhood comes from God —he made human
beings in his image.
4. Who God Reveals Himself to Be Part 2
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to discuss God's eternality, omniscience,
omnipotence, omnipresence, and immutability.
4. God is eternal. To say God is eternal is to say that he has always existed. There never
was a time when he was not, and there will never be a time when he will not be. Psalm
90:2 tells us, "Before the mountains were brought forth, or ever you had formed the earth
and the world, from everlasting to everlasting you are God. Jude 1:24-25 acknowledges
God's eternal nature: "Now to him who is able to keep you from stumbling and to present
CHAPTER 13 | 179
178 | CHAPTER 13
© Who God Is


<!-- page-3 -->

Engraving by
German painter
Julius Schnorr
von Carolsteld
180 | CHAPTER 13
you blameless before the presence of his glory with great joy, to the only God, our Savior,
through Jesus Christ our Lord, be glory, majesty, dominion, and authority, before all time
and now and forever. Amen."
5. God is all-knowing. We use the word omniscient to describe God's unique and
unbounded capacity for knowledge. God knows everything possible and actual. He
possesses complete knowledge of the past, present, and future. A passage we looked at
earlier, Romans 11:33, affirms: "Oh, the depth of the riches and wisdom and knowledge of
God! How unsearchable are his judgments and how inscrutable his ways!" Isaiah 46:9-10
says: "I am God, and there is no other; I am God,
and there is none like me, declaring the end from
the beginning and from ancient times things not
yet done, saying, 'My counsel shall stand, and I will
accomplish all my purpose.''
6. God is all-powerful. We use the word
omnipotent to say that God is perfect in power. God
possesses the power to do anything he desires. "Ah,
Lord God! It is you who have made the heavens
and the earth by your great power and by your
outstretched arm! Nothing is too hard for you"
(Jeremiah 32:17). In Mark 10:27, Jesus told his
disciples, "With man it is impossible, but not with
God. For all things are possible with God." This
does not mean, however, that God will do anything. God will not do the illogical for him,
such as make a squared circle or a married bachelor, nor will he act contrary to his nature.
7. God is present everywhere. We use the word omnipresent to say that God is eternally
present—in all places, at all times. Jeremiah 23:23-24 says, "Am I a God at hand, declares
the LoRD, and not a God far away? Can a man hide himself in secret places so that I
cannot see him? declares the LoRD. Do I not fill heaven and earth? declares the LORD."
Psalm 139:7-10 says, "Where shall I go from your Spirit? Or where shall I flee from your
presence? If I ascend to heaven, you are there! If I make my bed in Sheol, you are there! If I
take the wings of the morning and dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea, even there your
hand shall lead me, and your right hand shall hold me."
8. God is unchanging. God's character is immutable—constant and unchangeable. He
is the same yesterday, today, and forever (Hebrews 13:8). Numbers 23:19 says, "God is
not man, that he should lie, or a son of man, that he should change his mind. Has he
said, and will he not do it? Or has he spoken, and will he not fulfill it?" Psalm 33:11
concurs: "The counsel of the LoRD stands forever, the plans of his heart to all generations."
God's constancy is a source of protection for his people. "For I the Lord do not change;
therefore you, O children of Jacob, are not consumed" (Malachi 3:6).
5. Who God Reveals Himself to Be Part 3
OBJECTIVE: You will be able to explain that God is holy, wise. righteous.
and loving.
9, God is holy. To be holy means to be set apart. God is set apart from every hing
and everyone. No one is like him. He is absolutely pure. Scripture repeatedly affirms
this. Exodus 15:11 asks, "Who is like you, O LoRD, among the gods: Who is like you,
majestic in holiness, awesome in glorious deeds, doing wonders?" Revelation 4:8b says,
"Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord God Almighty, who was and is and is to come! Even
though no human being can be as holy as God, he makes us holy through his Holy
Spirit. 1 Peter 1:16 says, "You shall be holy, for I am holy"
10. God is wise. To say God is wise is to say he knows all the implications of his actual
and potential actions, bringing about no unintended consequences. Scripture direcly
affirms God's wisdom more than 200 times. Job 12:13 affirms, "With God are wisdom
and might; he has counsel and understanding." Psalm 104:24 says, "O LORD, how
manifold are your works! In wisdom have you made them all; the earth is full of your
creatures." People are seen to be wise when God's wisdom is in them, and to be fools when
knowledge of him is absent. "The fear of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge; fools
despise wisdom and instruction" (Proverbs 1:7).
11. God is righteous. God's righteousness refers to his justice and moral purity.
Deuteronomy 32:4 says he is a "God of faithfulness and without iniquity, just and upright
is he." Psalm 89:14 says, "Righteousness and justice are the foundation of your throne."
This is good news in a corrupt world. God will always do right. He can't be bribed and he
won't lie. He is in the business of righting wrongs. Part of that business means he rights
what is wrong in us, too. On the cross, Jesus gave us his righteousness, so that when God
looks at us, he sees us as holy and blameless in
his sight (Colossians 1:22). Our righteousness is
not our own, but a gift from God when we are
justified by faith in Christ.
12. God is loving. Love is so central to God's
character that to misunderstand it is to not
even know God. The apostle John says this
quite clearly: "Anyone who does not love does
not know God, because God is love" (1 John
4:8). God is "merciful and gracious, slow to
anger, and abounding in steadfast love and
faithfulness" (Exodus 34:6).
It is God's nature to love. And here's some
stunning news: because of the power of the Holy
Spirit, we can love this wav too. Romans 5:5 says God's love has been "poured into our
hearts through the Holy Spirit who has been given to us." It is this kind of love of which
the apostle Paul speaks in his famous passage on love:
FOUNDATIONS G
S Who God Is
Moses and the
Burning Bush,
painting by
Gebhard Fugel,
c. 1920
CHAPTER 13 / 181


<!-- page-4 -->

Love is patient and kind; love does not envy or boast; it is not arrogant or rude.
It does not insist on its own way; it is not irritable or resentful; it does not rejoice at
wrongdoing, but rejoices with the truth. Love bears all things, believes all things, hopes
all things, endures all things. -1 Corinthians 13:4-7
6. The Triune God
& doctrine of the
Trinity:
the Christian
belief that God is
one Being in three
Persons: Father,
Son, and Holy
Spirit
› OBJECTIVE: You will be able to summarize the doctrine of
the Trinity and argue that tritheism and modalism are false
beliefs.
On the surface at least, all of the above qualities are not too
difficult to grasp, even if it's a bit hard to imagine a being
possessing all these qualities. But there is a doctrine about God
that has confused people for centuries and still confuses people
today. The doctrine of the Trinity is the Christian belief that God
is one Being in three Persons: Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. In the
Trinity, "one divine Being eternally exists as three distinct centers
of consciousness, wholly equal in nature, genuinely personal in relationships, and each
mutually indwelling the other."0
The book Life's Biggest Questions: What the Bible Says about the Things That Matter
Most gives this helpful summary:
The biblical teaching on the Trinity is summarized with four essential affirmations: (1)
There is one—and only one—true and living God, (2) This one God eternally exists in
three persons-God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Spirit, (3) These three
Persons are completely equal in attributes, each having the same divine nature, and (4)
While each Person is fully and completely God, the Persons are not identical.!
Before we set out what Scripture says about the Trinity, let's first look at some common
incorrect ideas about the Trinity. Some people say it is like an egg with a shell, a white,
and a yolk, all together. But this is incorrect. Each part of an egg is a separate and distinct
part. To say the Trinity is like an egg is to flirt with tritheism, which is the belief that the
Trinity is composed of three separate and distinct gods.
But Scripture teaches there is only one God (1 Corinthians 8:6), not three. The
doctrine of the Trinity is not claiming
there is one God with three different
parts, or that there are three gods. The
Trinity teaches one God and three
Persons (One What and Three Whos).
Others say the Trinity is like the
o tritheism:
the belief that the Trinity
is composed of three
separate and distinct gods
three states of water: liquid, solid, and
gas. That comparison gets close to a false
belief that denies the "three-ness" of the
Trinity. Think about it like this-water
182 | CHAPTER 13
is one thing; yet, a sample of water cannot exist in its liquid, solid, gaseous forms at thi
same time. for example, it a sample of water is liquid, then it cannot at the same time b
in the form of a solid or a gas. Similarly, modalism is the belief that the Trinity is composed
of one God who over time presents himself in three different modes (Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit). According to modalism, God cannot be Father, Son, and Holy Spirit at the same
time; he can only be one person at a time.
In contrast, Scripture indicates that God is one essence in three distinct persons who
exist in relationship with one another. John 1:1 states that Jesus (the Word) was with God
at the beginning of creation, and Genesis 1:2 describes the Spirit of God hovering over the
waters at creation. So, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit existed simultaneously as three distinct
persons before the world began. Furthermore,
Matthew 3:13-17 shows that all three persons-
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit-were present and
active at Jesus' baptism. If modalism were true,
such an episode would make no sense. God
does not appear in three different modes (as in,
sometimes he shows up as Father, sometimes as
Son, sometimes as Holy Spirit). Rather, the one
God is three separate and distinct Persons—
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.
It might surprise you to know that the word
€ modalism:
the belief that the
Trinity is composed
of one God who
over time presents
himself in three
different modes
(Father, Son, and
Holy Spirit
Trinity isn't in the Bible. The term was first used
by Tertullian, an African theologian who lived
between AD 150 and 220, to describe the "three and yet one" nature of God. But the
doctrine of the Trinity is not one person's clever invention; it is rooted in biblical teaching,
which is why the church continues to teach it today. Let's consider how the three Persons
of the Trinity are described as God in the Old and New Testaments.
GOD
7. The Trinity in the Old Testament
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to use Old Testament verses to support that God is
three Persons in one.
We already quoted several verses in the Old Testament that show God referring to himself
as singular. Yet, God also refers to himself in the plural in passages such as Genesis 3:22,
11:7, and Isaiah 6:8. The names we learned for God from Genesis 1 and 2, Yahweh and
Elohim, also teach the singular and plural nature of God. In the Old Testament, each
member of the Trinity-Father, Son, and Holy Spirit - is called God and displays the
attributes of deity.
The Old Testament reveals God as Father. God called the nation of Israel his children
and wanted them to call him Father: "I said, How I would set you among my sons, and
give you a pleasant land, a heritage most beautiful of all nations. And I thought you would
call me, My Father, and would not turn from following me" (Jeremiah 319). And at
times, they did call him Father (Isaiah 63:16, 64:8).
CHAPTER 13 | 183
S Who God Is


<!-- page-5 -->

Isaiah is also the prophet through whom God told the world he would send God the
Son to redeem humankind: "Therefore the Lord himself will give you a sign. Behold, the
virgin shall conceive and bear a son, and shall call his name Immanuel" (Isaiah 7:14).
Immanuel means God is with us. Isaiah 9:6 adds, "For to us a
child is born, to us a son is given; and the government shall
be upon his shoulder, and his name shall be called Wonderful
Counselor, Mighty God, Everlasting Father, Prince of Peace."
Isaiah wrote about God the Holy Spirit as well: "And the
Spirit of the LorD shall rest upon him, the Spirit of wisdom
and understanding, the Spirit of counsel and might, the Spirit
of knowledge and the fear of the LoRD" (Isaiah 11:2). This Spirit
would rest on the coming Messiah, the Son of God: "The Spirit
of the LorD God is upon me, because the LoRD has anointed
me to bring good news to the poor; he has sent me to bind up
the brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the
opening of the prison to those who are bound" (Isaiah 61:1).
Jesus quoted this verse about himself in Luke 4:18.
The Holy Spirit was active in creation: "In the beginning,
God created the heavens and the earth. The earth was without
form and void, and darkness was over the face of the deep.
And the Spirit of God was hovering over the face of the waters"
(Genesis 1:1-2). The Spirit dwells in God's servants: "Cast me
not away from your presence, and take not your Holy Spirit from me" (Psalm 51:11). This
same Spirit would be poured out on all people in a coming day, according to the promise
made in Joel 2:28-29.
These verses about the deity of the three Persons of the Trinity can appear
contradictory and confusing without the light shed on them in the New Testament, which
we will consider next.
8. The Trinity in the New Testament
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to identify New Testament verses that confirm
God is Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.
Several passages in the New Testament mention all three Persons of the Trinity together,
such as Matthew 28:19-20, John 14:26, 2 Corinthians 13:14, Hebrews 9:14, 1 Peter 1:1-2,
and Jude 1:20-21. One of the clearest accounts of all three Persons being present together
is the baptism of Jesus. "And when Jesus was baptized, immediately he went up from
the water, and behold, the heavens were opened to him, and he saw the Spirit of God
descending like a dove and coming to rest on him; and behold, a voice from heaven said,
"This is my beloved Son, with whom I am well pleased'" (Matthew 3:16-17).
In addition to presenting the three Persons of the Godhead all together, in the New
Testament the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are each individually called God and display
the attributes of deity.
The Father is God: Jesus reters to God the Father in passages such as John 5:17 «B
Jesus answered them, My Father is working until now, and I am working?" And again,
one chapter later, "Do not work for the food that perishes, but for the food that endures
to eternal life, which the Son of Man will give to you. For on him God the Father has set
his seal" (John 6:27). God the Father is mentioned often in Acts (1:4,233,10.38) and the
epistles (1 Corinthians 8:6, Galatians 4:6, Ephesians 1:17, 2:18, 1 Peter 1.2, 2 Peter 1:17).
The Son is God: Jesus was called God from before his birch. "All this took place to fulfll
what the Lord had said through the prophet: "Behold, the virgin will conceive and bear
a son, and they shall call his name Immanuel, (which means God with us" (Matthew
1:22-23). John 1:1 introduces Jesus as the Word, "And the Word was with God, and the
Word was God." Thomas called Jesus, "My Lord and my God" (John 20.28). In the
epistles Jesus is recognized as "God over all" (Romans 95) Titus 213 talks abour "waiting
for our blessed hope, the appearing of the glory of our great God and Savior Jesus Christ."
And Hebrews 1:3 says, "He is the radiance of the glory of God and the exact imprint of his
nature, and he upholds the universe by the word of his power."
The Holy Spirit is God: The Gospels contain references to the Holy Spirit in conjunction
with the Father and the Son, but they also show the Holy Spirit is himself God. Scripture
shows the Holy Spirit manifesting God's attributes: omnipresence
(Psalm 139:7), omniscience (1 Corinthians 2:10-11), and
omnipotence (Job 33:4). In Acts 5:3-4, Ananias, the man who lied
about his offering, is asked by Peter why he allowed Satan to fill his
heart to deceive the Holy Spirit. Peter added, "You have not lied to
man but to God." To the church in Corinth, Paul writes, "Do you
not know that you are God's temple and that God's Spirit dwells
in you?" (1 Corinthians 3:16) and "But you were washed, you were
sanctified, you were justified in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ
and by the Spirit of our God" (1 Corinthians 6:11).
9. Why the Trinity Matters
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to give reasons why the Trinity is important to the
Christian faith.
We have seen that the Trinity is one Being (one God) in three distinct Persons (Father,
Son, and Spirit, each of whom is fully God. We've also seen how both the Old and New
Testaments affirm this doctrine. But so what? What possible difference could it make
to your Christian faith that God is a Trinity? According to theologian Michael Reeves,
the Trinity makes all the difference in the world. In fact, the Trinity is "what makes
Christianity absolutely distinct."2 Ler's consider three ways in which the Trinity makes a
difference to your faith.
For starters, consider that a solitary God, defined primarily by his power, wouldnt
have anyone to love or anyue asey, to love. But God's trinitarian nature means that before
184 | CHAPTER 13
5 Who God Is
Dove of the Holy
Spirit, Chiesa
Spirito Santo
dei Napoletani,
Rome, Italy
CHAPTER 13 | 185


<!-- page-6 -->

all of creation, the Facher was sharing life and love with the Son and the Holy Spirit. God
created us, not because he needed us to be who he is, but because it is in his nature to
share life and love.!3
Secondly, the Son, being in perfect harmony with the Father and Spirit, shares the life
of the Trinity with us in unique ways. Through Jesus we can know God truly (John 1:18)
and be saved (John 14:6). 1 John 4:9 says that the Father showed his love for us by sending
"his only Son into the world, so that we might live through him." Jesus not only shows us
what God is like, he shows us what it means to be truly human. He models how we can
do the works of the Father (John 5:17) in the power of the Spirit (Luke 4:14). Jesus shows
us what a truly life-giving, others-centered life can look like. He invites us to receive God's
love through faith and give it out again to others.
Finally, the Trinity provides the model for Christian community. In the Trinity, there
is both diversity (three distinct Persons) and unity (one God). The members of the Trinity
are separate Persons, yet they are all united in a perfect relationship of love and harmony.
Christian community should also be characterized by unity and diversity. The members
of our Christian community come from many different backgrounds (Romans 10:12,
Galatians 3:28, Colossians 3:11). Even though
each member has specific characteristics and
gifts, all receive the same Spirit and are part of
the same body (1 Corinthians 12:4-7, 12-13;
Ephesians 4:4-6). The gospel does not demand
that we ignore our differences, but it does call us
all to unity (1 Corinthians 1:10, 2 Corinthians
13:11, Philippians 2:2-3, Colossians 3:13-14).
As we love one another and strive for peace
and reconciliation, we reflect the harmonious
relationship of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.
Even though the Trinity can be challenging
to understand, it makes all the difference to our
view of God, salvation, and community.
10. Conclusion
Our discussion of God's nature and character in this chapter can be summarized in this
statement by the late theology professor Gordon R. Lewis:
God is an invisible, personal, and living Spirit, distinguished from all other spirits
by several kinds of attributes: metaphysically, God is self-existent, eternal, and
unchanging; intellectually, God is omniscient, faithful, and wise; ethically, God
is just, merciful, and loving; emotionally, God detests evil, is longsuffering, and is
compassionate; existentially, God is free, authentic, and omnipotent; relationally, God
is transcendent in being, immanent universally in providential activity, and immanent
with his people in redemptive activity!
186 | CHAPTER 13
This can all seem pretty complicated. But the goal of theology is not merely to learn
more or think more accurately about God. Instead, we want to know God personally and
love him with all of our mind and heart, as Jesus stated in Matthew 22:37. As we grow
in our love for God, we will also grow in our desire to know his thoughts and values.
The best theology is more than an academic
discipline; it is a way of loving, of knowing, and
of cherishing God. Good theology is an act of
worship of the very highest sort.
The proper response to the God of the Bible
is worship. We bow down in humble awe and
reverence to the perfect, utterly trustworthy, only
wise, self-existent, personal, completely unselfish,
The proper
response to the
God of the Bible
Is worship.
great, good God—Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.
In the next chapter, we'll see how getting to
know this God leads to a loving relationship with
him and an outward flow of love to others.
ENDNOTES
Paul Froese and Christopher Bader, America's Four Gods: What We Say about God & What That Says about Us
(New York: Oxford University Press, 2010), 33-34.
2A. W. Tozer, Knowledge of the Holy (New York: HarperCollins, 1961), 1.
3"When Americans Say They Believe in God, What Do They Mean?" Pew Research Center, April 25, 2018,
https://www.pewforum.org/2018/04/25/when-americans-say-they-believe-in-god-what-do-they-meanl.
4Francis A. Schaeffer, He Is There and He Is Not Silent (Carol Stream, IL: Tyndale House Publishers, 1972).
Quoted in Thomas V. Morris, Our Idea of God: An Introduction to Philosophical Theology (Downers Grove,
IL: InterVarsity Press, 1991), 35.
"Anselm quoted in Morris, Our Idea of God, 35.
'Jonathan Morrow, "Can We Truly Know an Infinite God!" Think Christianly (blog), December 29, 2012,
http://www.thinkchristianly.org/can-we-truly-know-an-infinite-god/.
William Lane Craig, Dr. Craig's What Is God Like? God Is Self-Sufficient. The Attributes of God for Children
(Self-published, CreateSpace, 2012), back cover copy.
'Froese and Bader, America's Four Gods, 5.
"J. Scott Horrell, "The Eternal Son of God in the Social Trinity," in Jesus in Trinitarian Perspective: An
Introductory Christology, eds. Fred Sanders and Klaus Issler (Nashville: B&H Academic, 2007), 47-48.
"'Erik Thoennes, Lif's Biggest Questions: What the Bible Says about the Things That Matter Most Wheaton, IL:
Crossway, 2011), 71-72.
12Michael Reeves, Delighting in the Trinity: An Introduction to the Christian Faith Downer's Grove, IL:
Inter Varsity Press, 2012), 15.
1 Reeves, Delighting in the Trinity, 19-38.
"Gordon R. Lewis, "Attributes of God," in Evangelical Dictionary of Theology, ed. Walter A. Elwell (Grand
Rapids: Baker Academic, 2001), 492.
CHAPTER 13 | 187
© Who God Is
