# Chapter 14

<!-- page-1 (book p.14) -->

Who God Wants.
Us to Be
1. Being Human
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to explain what being human means and why we
have a need for God.
Who am I? Who do I want to be? These are just two of the many questions that we ask
ourselves on the road to self-discovery. Knowing ourselves is essential to living well in
the world. Learning more about our personalities, temperaments, and deepest desires is
important. But have you ever stopped to ask, "Who does God want me to be?» Answering
this question is essential to understanding our true identity.
An accurate picture of ourselves must begin with
the fact that we are all human. In Genesis 1:26-27,
we discover that humans are made in God's image.
We are not an accident, trash, a mistake, or a cruel
experiment. Being made in God's image means that
we have dignity and worth right from the ger-go.
We are so valuable that Christ gave his life for us so
that we might become God's children and share in
all his blessings (John 1:12-13, Galatians 4:1-7,
1 John 3:1-3).
In Genesis 2:18, we discover that humans are made for relationships. Human life is
defined by our relationships with God, ourselves, others, and creation. God gave us the
capacity to make choices and to love others. While we are not able to do these things
perfectly, like God can, we are still called to imitate him (1 John 2:6, 1 Peter 221). We
also learn from Scripture that humans have responsibility in God's world, to rule over it
(Genesis 1:26, 28; Psalm 8:3-6).
Though we have a privileged place in God's creation, we are not gods. We are limited
beings, dependent on God (Acts 17:28, 1 Corinthians 8:6). Without him, we (and
everything else) would cease to exist. Compared with God, we are quite limited; compared
with the universe, we are small. Yet, our limitations are not meant to hold us down or to
keep us from achieving our potential. Rather, they cause us to realize our need for God
and others, and so drive us out of ourselves to seek relationships.
It's also clear from Scripture that humans have a major problem. But the problem is
not that we are human, but that our humanity has been corrupted, hijacked by the curse
of sin. As descendants of Adam and Eve, we have all inherited a sin nature, which has
crippled our ability to do what is right (Psalm 14:2-3, Romans 5:12). Through our sinful
thoughts and actions, we rebel against God, hurt other people,
abuse ourselves, and disregard God's creation. In trusting Jesus,
we begin the process of sanctification, but the battle against
sın is one that we must fight our whole lives. C. S. Lewis
summarized this well at the end of his book Prince Caspian. To
be descended from Adam and Eve, Aslan says, "is both honour
enough to erect the head of the poorest beggar, and shame
enough to bow the shoulders of the greatest emperor on earch."
Because of sin, another of our present limitations is that our
lives are mortal. Over time, our bodies decay and eventually
die. In trusting Jesus, we have been given eternal life. But until
the kingdom comes, we live in the time of already and not yet.
We are confident that God will transform our sinful natures
and grant us new bodies that will never die.
Humans are not perfect now, but they have the hope of being perfected in the furure.
Being human is not a problem; it is an incredible gift. It is who God made us to be.
CHAPTER 14 | 189
© Who God Wants Us to Be


<!-- page-2 -->

& Docetism:
the heretical
teaching
that
Jesus was
completely
divine
and only
appeared to
be human
2. Living in the Here and Now
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to express that because Jesus was fully human, he
is a model we can follow for holy living in this world.
We have said that being human is not the problem. There is no clearer evidence of this
in Scripture than the fact that Jesus himself was fully human (God incarnate). He is
the model of everything that humans were meant to be—the one who submitted to the
Father's will, loved without reservation, and gave of
himself for the sake of others. If we are to become who
God made us to be, we must learn to follow Jesus.
The Gospel writers are united in affirming that Jesus
was a living, breathing human being-that Jesus "became
flesh and dwelt among us" (John 1:14). The four Gospels
are based on eyewitness testimony from those who knew
Jesus while he walked on earth.? Jesus' humanity was also
affirmed by Paul, who wrote about how Jesus appeared,
when he had been "manifested in the flesh" (1 Timothy
3:16). As a human, Jesus had a physical body. He would
have experienced headaches, tiredness, and stubbed toes;
and the need to eat and drink, to use the bathroom, and
to sleep. He also would have been subject to all kinds of
temptations—including temptations to steal, lust, cheat,
or lie (Hebrews 2:17-18).
You may be used to thinking about Jesus in this way,
but the idea of God becoming human would have been
scandalous in Jesus' time. For the Jews, a human being claiming to be God was blasphemy
(John 10:33). Certainly, no one was expecting God to come as a helpless child born of a
virgin, but this is exactly what happened (Matthew 1:23). For Gentiles, the idea of God
becoming human was simply foolishness. Appalled by the idea that God would reveal
himself as a lowly human, some people rejected the humanity of Christ altogether. Instead,
they taught Docetism, which is the heretical teaching that Jesus was completely divine and only
appeared to be human. This belief was ultimately rejected by the church as a heresy.
As a human, Jesus was in the closest possible relationship with the Father (John 1:18).
He knew himself as God's beloved Son (Matthew 3:17), sent to bring salvation (Luke
19:10). Unlike all other humans, Jesus chose to submit himself totally to God, rejecting
all temptation and never sinning (Hebrews 4:15, 1 Peter 2:22). Unlike other humans,
Jesus did not play favorites. Jesus did not select a few privileged people and teach them
how to withdraw from the world by contemplating secret spiritual knowledge. Instead,
Jesus ministered on the streets and in the towns to all, including the poor, oppressed, and
downtrodden. He came into our mess and walked around in it. Frequently, he invited
people to follow him (Luke 18:22).
Jesus does not call us to withdraw from society or escape the world; nor are we to
denigrate the material creation in favor of more "spiritual" concerns. If we are to follow
Tesus, we must deal with the here-and-now of earthly life. This means not iust tolerating,
but loving the frustrating and dithcult people in our lives. It means looking for ways to
worship God in our physical work and in the humdrum moments of everyday life. To
follow Jesus is to follow him into the mud and muck of the human experience. But it is
also to share in the joy and wonder of what God is doing and who he is making us to be.
3. Becoming Like God and Glorifying Him
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to infer that as we follow Jesus, our character is
gradually transformed so we can glorify God.
The call to follow Jesus is a call to be more human, but it is also a call to imitate Jesus
and ultimately to become more like him. To be clear, we do not become God; rather, we
become like him through the transforming work of the Holy Spirit. As this happens, we
are not absorbed into God, nor do we become indistinguishable look-alikes or miniature
copies of Jesus. Rather, in becoming like Jesus, we become the individuals we were created
to be-loving people who glorify God in everything we do.
In Matthew 5:48, Jesus said: "You therefore must be perfect, as your heavenly Father
is perfect." Throughout the rest of the Bible, we find similar statements. God commanded
the people of Israel to be holy, "for I the Lord your God am holy" (Leviticus 19:2); and
later, Peter told Christians the same thing (1 Peter 1:16). If you're like many people, these
commands sound impossible, even absurd. However, being "perfect" here does not mean
that we will never sin again. The word used for "perfect" in Matthew 5:48 is the Greek
word telios. It refers to a goal, to something or someone that is complete, perfect, or
spiritually mature.
We are to grow up into maturity by following Jesus. This means that we draw our
standard for living from God's character, not what culture tells us. Bur fulfilling Jesus'
directive isn't only up to us. We can expect God's help, being confident that he will one
day complete his work in us (Philippians 1:6).
Thus, "be perfect" is "a command, a promise,
and statement of hope." As we follow Jesus, we
are transformed into who God wants us to be,
so that we may glorify God.
What does it mean to glorify God, though?
& glorify God: to make God famous
by worshipping him and attesting -
to his goodness through holiness
and acts of love
Does it mean we only watch certain movies,
pray before every meal, or make sure that every
event we take part in has an evangelistic focus?
While these can all be good things, these kinds
of actions by themselves do not communicate
what glorifying God is all about. Something
that has "glory" has weight or value. In glorifying God, we ascribe weight or value to
him, giving him the honor of which he is worthy. To glorify God is to make God famous
by worshipping him and attesting to his goodness through holines and acts of love.
CHAPTER 14 | 191
CHAPTER 14
FOUNDATIONS G


<!-- page-3 -->

Glorifying God is about mirroring God's character and priorities in all we do. It means
living our lives in such a way that God can be known in and through us. That's another
reason why Jesus is our model. Throughout his life, Jesus made God famous through
holiness and acts of love. He did not seek to glorify himself (John 8:50); rather, he desired
that the Father would be glorified through him (John 17:1-3). Jesus emptied himself of
his own glory, so that others might see the Father. Jesus' sacrificial death was the ultimate
act that brought glory to the Father and salvation to the world. This is the example we are
called to imitate (2 Corinthians 8:9, Philippians 2:3-8, 1 Peter 2:21).
4. Participating in the Divine Life
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to describe the benefits of being in union with
Christ.
Jesus' invitation to follow him in becoming more like him is an invitation to share in the
divine life of God. In 2 Peter 1:4 we read that God has given us "great promises" so that
"through them you may become partakers of the divine nature." What can this possibly
mean?
& Arianism:
the heretical
teaching that
Jesus was only
a divine being
created by the
Father
To understand what Peter is talking about, we must look at Jesus, who was fully
human and fully God (Colossians 2:9). Jesus said or implied this many times, and it got
him into trouble with the religious leaders (Matthew 9:1-7; John 1:1, 5:18, 10:33). Jesus was
not just another human leader or a good teacher.
He was God himself. This can be a difficult
concept to accept; that's why some people instead
taught that Jesus was not God, but rather a divine
being created by God. This is known as Arianism,
which is the heretical teaching that Jesus was only
a divine being created by the Father. Arianism was
also rejected as heresy by the church.
As God, Jesus shows us what the divine life
of God is all about—love, generosity, goodness,
holiness, justice, peace, and so on. We do not
naturally live like God does because we are slaves
to sin (John 8:34, Romans 6:19). Only God can break the power of sin; that's why Jesus'
divinity is so important. When we trust Jesus, we become participants in the divine
nature. We are no longer bound by our sin nature but instead are alive to God in Christ
Jesus (Romans 6:6-7, II). Through the Holy Spirit, we are empowered to resist temptation
and live holy lives.
Through Jesus, we have been united to God. We were buried with him in death-that
is, through the cross, Jesus has conquered sin so that we can die to sin—and we have been
raised to new life in Jesus. Our old self has died so that the new self (who we were made to
be) can come alive (Romans 6). This is union with Christ.
In being united to Christ, we become participants in the life of God. We do not become
mini-gods or God's equals. Nor are we absorbed into God. Rather, we remain distinct from
God, yet we are invited into the joyous life of
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. We are invited to
become more like Christ in character and action.
This process begins now, and will be completed
when Jesus returns at the end of all things.
Then we will be glorified (2 Corinthians 3:18,
Philippians 3:20-21, 1 John 3:2). Glorification is
the doctrine that all believers will be finally freed
from sin, restored, and given new, eternal bodies.
& glorification:
the doctrine that
all believers will
be finally freed
from sin, restored,
and given new,
eternal bodies
As we await our glorification, we can
begin growing in holiness now. We do this
by walking in the Spirit, following Jesus'
commands, learning to say no to sin, and giving of ourselves for the sake of others.
Though it may not always be evident to us, as we grow we gradually learn to abide more
in Christ (John 15:4-5).
5. Becoming a Servant
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to conclude that following Jesus requires serving
others.
In Philippians 2:3-4, Paul wrote to the church, "Do nothing from selfish ambition or
conceit, but in humility count others more significant than yourselves. Let each of you
look not only to [your] own interests, but also to the interests of others." Most of us do not
consider others first. We tend to operate out of our own needs and wants. We spend a lot
of time trying to get ahead, often seeking fame, power, and popularity at the expense of
others. However, Paul called Christians to be servants.
The Greek word for servant in the New Testament is doulos, which can also mean slave.
The word slave rightly makes us uncomfortable given the evils of slavery we have witnessed
throughout history. But to be a slave of God (Romans 6:22) is not the same as being
forced into subjugation by another. Instead, it is to imitate Jesus, the one who willingly
"emptied himself, by taking the form of a servant, being born in the likeness of men. And
being found in human form, he humbled himself by becoming obedient to the point of
death, even death on a cross" (Philippians 2:7-8).
Though he was God, Jesus didn't come to earth to show off his power, nor did he
expect everyone to grovel before him, attending to his every desire. He came as a servant
(Luke 22:27) "to seek and save the lost" (Luke 19:10). When Jesus wanted to show his
disciples what God was really like, he didn't call fire down from heaven or lead them in a
charge against the Romans. He got down on his hands and knees and washed their feet
(John 13:1-17). This was the lowest of all jobs, reserved only for the lowest of slaves? Yet
Jesus did it gladly, and he told his disciples to follow his example.
To be a servant is to be others-centered, seeking their benefit and well-being before
your own. This kind of service requires humility, but humility does not mean talking
down about vourself or feeling like vou are worthless. Those who are truly humble
CHAPTER 14 | 193
192 | CHAPTER 14
S Who God Wants Us to Be


<!-- page-4 -->

Gace (Basse-
Normandie,
France)
recognize that God has gifted them; instead of using their talents
to boost their ego or get power, they use their gifts in the service
of others. They recognize how gracious God has been to them
and wish to share that grace with everyone. For a true servant, no
job is too low, no person unworthy.
Serving others, like Jesus did, doesn't necessarily mean that we
never hold positions of leadership; it means that when we do have
authority, we use it for others benefit. Jesus warned his disciples
about "lording" it over each other. Leadership for Jesus isn't
defined by being in charge and telling other people what to do,
but rather by serving. If we want to be great in God's kingdom,
Jesus says, we must become servants (Mark 10:42-45).
We serve others by providing for their needs (James 1:27);
comforting them in sorrow (Romans 12:15); giving of our time,
talent, and treasure (2 Corinthians 9:6-15); submitting to one
another (Ephesians 5:21); bearing each other's burdens (Galatians
6:2); and sometimes, even giving our lives (John 15:13). We are
called to serve others no matter who they are, what they look like,
what they say, and what they do. In giving of ourselves to others, we are not less; instead,
we become most truly who we were created to be.
6. Picking Up the Cross
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to discuss how following Jesus requires us to pick
up our cross daily and be willing to face suffering and persecution for his sake.
One day, Jesus was speaking with his disciples about how he was going to be persecuted
and ultimately killed by religious and political leaders. Alarmed, Peter took him aside and
told him that such things could never happen to him. But Jesus sharply rebuked Peter
and told his disciples, "If anyone would come after me, let him deny himself and take up
his cross and follow me. For whoever would save his life will lose it, but whoever loses his
life for my sake will find it" (Matthew 16:21-25). If we are to find true life, we must deny
ourselves and follow Jesus into suffering.
This is perhaps Jesus least-liked teaching. After all, no one wants to experience pain,
suffering, or persecution. Much of our time is spent trying to avoid these altogether, but
that's not the way of Jesus. He did not avoid trouble by telling people what they wanted
to hear; rather, he boldly confronted religious leaders for their sin, even though he knew it
would cost him his life. He refused to sidestep the suffering of the cross. He willingly went
right into it. In giving his life, Jesus offered us true life.
Following Jesus does not lead to ease, comfort, or material prosperity. Jesus promised
his disciples that they would experience trouble in this world (John 16:33). As Jesus was
persecuted, so too would his followers be persecuted (John 15:20). Jesus' disciples could
expect to be hated, dragged before councils, imprisoned, tortured, and sometimes even put
to death (Matthew 24:9, Mark 13:9, Luke 21:12). For followers of Jesus, suffering is not so
much a matter of if, but when.
194 | CHAPTER 14
When persecution comes, we may be tempted to think that God has forgotten us.
Yet, Jesus promises that he will be with us (Matthew 28:20): he will never abandon.
(Hebrews 13:5). Having experienced suffering himself, he knows what it is like and
sympathizes with us (Hebrews 4:15). He is stronger than evil, and ultimately, he will bring
justice for all those who suffer for his name (Revelation 6:10-11, 11:18). Jesus said that
those who suffer for righteousness sake will be blessed. They are not left out or abandoned
but will inherit the kingdom of God (Matthew 5:10-12).
However, experiencing persecution does not automatically mean that we are following
Jesus faithfully. If as believers we are persecuted for being rude, uninformed, ungenerous,
or hateful, this cannot be called suffering for Christ. Peter said Christians should be
characterized by love, gentleness, and respect, always repaying evil with good
(1 Peter 3:8-22). If we experience suffering for
living like Christ, we are blessed, but not if
we experience suffering for doing evil. When
we truly experience suffering for Christ,
we can have joy by entrusting ourselves to
God's loving care (2 Corinthians 4:17,
1 Peter 4:12-19).
Ultimately, suffering for Christ
prepares us for future glory. The suffering
we experience here cannot even begin to
compare to the future glory that will be
revealed when we are remade (Romans
8:18). We can be confident that in all things, God is working for our good, so that we
can become the people he created us to be (Romans 8:28-30). Nothing-not "trouble
or hardship or persecution or famine or nakedness or danger or sword"-can separate us
from God's love (Romans 8:31-39).
7. Living in Hope
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to differentiate Christian hope from optimism and
pessimism, and explain why believers can have such hope.
Following Jesus is not always easy. It will sometimes feel like we are wasting our time or
missing out on the fun. Yet through the centuries, Christians have continued to follow
Jesus, even when it led to persecution and suffering, or when everything seemed to be
going wrong, or when it seemed that God was silent. Why did they do this? The answer is
that they had hope.
Christian hope is not optimism. The optimist tends to look on the bright side,
minimizing negative feelings and experiences. In the face of evil and suffering, the
optimist simply asserts that things will get better. This makes it dificult to deal with real
problems.
Christian hope is not pessimism. A pessimist views a situation in the most negative
light possible. Seeino everything that is wrone with the world, the pessimist despairs of
the possibility of redemption or restoration. Even in the face of good, the pessimist refuses
S Who God Wants Us to Be
CHAPTER 14 | 195


<!-- page-5 -->

to believe that things can get better. The pessimist's despair offers no motivation for
addressing what is wrong.
Neither optimists nor pessimists look accurately at reality. In contrast to both,
Christian hope honestly acknowledges the pain, suffering, and evil in our world, and
instead of despairing, it prays for guidance and works to change things.
When we hope, we hope in something or someone. For Christians, the object of our
hope is Jesus. Hope looks backward to what Jesus has done on the cross and forward
to his second coming. The Bible describes Jesus in his resurrection as the "firstfruits" of
those who have died (1 Corinthians 15:20, 23). Because of Jesus' resurrection, Christians
can have hope that death does not have the final say and that one day, they too, will rise
again (John 11:25, Romans 6:5). When Jesus comes
again, the Bible promises that he will finish off sin
and death once and for all, establish his kingdom,
and make all things new (Revelation 20-22). A
& Christian hope:
trusting in what
Jesus has done
Christian's hope is "a resolute, unwavering hold
on something that has happened and will happen."
Christian hope is trusting in what Jesus has done and
Christian hope implies waiting, but it is not
simply sitting around until Jesus comes back.
Rather, Christian hope is a kind of "loyalty."' It is
an allegiance to Jesus. It is trusting that as we await
his kingdom, he is working through us even now
to bring hope to the world. Instead of causing us to put up our feet and letting things be,
hope motivates Christians to get busy serving God (1 Corinthians 15:54-58). Because
we hope in Jesus, we can do good and be generous (1 Timothy 6:18), live in strength and
joy (Isaiah 40:31), endure trials (1 Thessalonians 1:3), and lay down our lives for others
(1 John 3:16-18). Even when all the odds are against our success, hope motivates us to
persevere. We keep sharing the love of Jesus because no situation is hopeless; no person is
beyond God's reach. All this we do as we await our "blessed hope, the appearing of the
glory of our great God and Savior Jesus Christ" (Titus 2:13).
8. Growing in Christlikeness
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to give biblical examples of growing in
Christlikeness.
In Christ, we are new creations (2 Corinthians 5:17), empowered by God's Holy Spirit
to live lives that glorify him. But becoming like Christ is a lifelong journey, and along
the way we will continue to wrestle with our sin nature. Thankfully, Jesus is ready to give
us grace and forgiveness (1 John 1:9). Growth in Christlikeness happens as we walk in
the Spirit, learning to say yes to God, to imitate his character, and to be obedient to his
commands. We do this together with others in all our relationships with family, friends,
mentors, and more. Let's consider three people who grew in Christlikeness.
196 | CHAPTER 14
FOUNDATIONS G
One of Jesus' first and most famous disciples was Peter. Peter could be hotheaded.
overzealous, overeager, foolish, and unthinking. The Gospel writers tell of his many
blunders. He spoke when he should have been silent (Mark 9:4-7), refused to believe tha
Jesus would suffer (Matthew 16:21-23), resisted Jesus offer to wash his feet (lohn 13:6-
10), used violence when Jesus was arrested (John 18:10), and ultimately denied Jesus three
times (Luke 22:54-62). Yet Peter was one of Jesus closest friends. After Jesus' resurrection,
Tesus restored Peter and told him to lead God's people (John 21:15-19). Peter became a
leader in the early church. He boldly preached in front of crowds (Acts 2:14-36), healed a
lame man (Acts 3), and refused to stop preaching Jesus even when threatened (Acts 41-
22). Peter continued to grow. At one point, Paul confronted Peter for acting hypocritically
(Galatians 2:11-21). Peter humbly accepted Paul's rebuke and later he commended Paul's
writings (2 Peter 3:16). Eventually, Peter was martyred in Rome for his witness for Christ.
Martha, the sister of Mary and Lazarus, was also close to Jesus. When he first visited
her house, Martha was too busy with preparations to sit and listen to him. She complained
to Jesus that Mary wasn't helping her. But Jesus compassionately told Martha that though
she was worried about many things, Mary had chosen what was better listening at Jesus
feet (Luke 10:38-42). This must have been hard for Martha to hear. We can imagine her
frustration. Sometime later, Lazarus died. This time, Martha went to meet Jesus before he
arrived, and listened to him. She boldly professed her faith in Jesus as God's Messiah. She
was confident that God would give Jesus whatever he asked for (John 11:17-27). We do
not know exactly what happened to Martha after this,
but some traditions say that she shared the gospel in
what is now southern France.!°
After being radically converted, the apostle Paul
became one of Jesus' most influential followers
(Acts 9). He endured great suffering for Christ (2
Corinthians 11:16-33) and was eventually martyred in
Becoming
like Christ
is a lifclong
Journey.
Rome. But before that, Paul became a spiritual guide
for many believers. He called others to follow him as
he followed Christ (1 Corinthians 11:1). Paul acted as a
mentor to his younger colleague Timothy. Paul called
Timothy his "true child in the faith" (1 Timothy 1:2)
and wrote two letters to encourage him in his pastoral
ministry at the church in Ephesus. Because Timothy was so young, he may have been
intimidated by older believers and false teachers, but Paul urged him to be confident in
using his gifts (1 Timothy 4:12). This mentoring relationship encouraged growth in both
Paul and Timothy.
9. Growing Together
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to summarize why it is necessary for believers to
be in community.
Having experienced God's grace irection, lives, Peter, Martha, Paul, Timothy, and many
others sought to become like him and live for his glory. But they did not do this alone.
CHAPTER 14 | 197


<!-- page-6 -->

Growing in Christlikeness is something that happens in community. Following Jesus isn't
about you, Jesus, and a Bible only. As we learned in Genesis 1-2, humans were created for
relationships with other people, so to be most fully who God created us to be, we must
join with others as we follow Jesus.
Following Jesus in community can provide companionship, encouragement, and
protection. However, being in community can be challenging. The church is filled with
people like ourselves who are struggling with sin, trying but often failing to follow Jesus.
Faced with this, many choose to bail on the church. Yet, the New Testament is clear. We
are to bear with one another (Colossians 3:13), seek fellowship with one another (1 John
1:7), and meet together to encourage each other (Hebrews 10:24-25). There are no solo
Christians. In fact, much of what Jesus and the apostles taught is practically impossible to
live out unless you are in community.
The New Testament churches provide a clear picture of the joys and challenges of
following Jesus in community. It is easy to idealize the early churches, but these churches
were just as broken and messed up as our own churches today. The first-century churches
were filled with people from all different backgrounds and social statuses, and there
was a lot of fighting. Here is a brief snapshot of the problems faced by some of the early
Christians communities.'
• Rome: This church had an issue with unity, especially between Jews and Gentiles.
Paul taught them that the gospel welcomed both Jews and Gentiles.
• Corinth: Among other things, this church had problems with popularity contests
around particular leaders and had at least one case of sexual misconduct. Paul
challenged the believers to follow Christ and to take sexual integrity seriously.
• Galatia: This church was plagued by people who were teaching that it was necessary
to follow Jewish customs in order to be saved. Paul argued that this was a false gospel
and urged the church to reject it.
• Thessalonica: This church was experiencing persecution and uncertainty about the
return of Christ. Paul wrote to strengthen their convictions and give them hope about
Christ's return.
• Churches of the Diaspora (those scattered around the empire): These churches
may have struggled to "walk the talk." James encouraged them to live out their faith
through action, not just words.
• Churches of Asia Minor: These churches were in danger of compromising their faith
and worship. John challenged them to remain faithful to Jesus even in the midst of
persecution.
198 | CHAPTER 14
Following Jesus together is not easy, but it is necessary. We should not be surprised
at the problems that arise in church communities because we are all sinners. In fact, one
author put it this way, "If the group is totally nice, that is a sure sign that something has
gone wrong. For here are the foolish, weak, lowly, and despised of the world, whom God
has chosen ... "12 This motiey group of people is brought together by God's Spirit. And
throughout history, they have had an incredibly positive impact on society-fostering
education, art, and science; providing relief to the poor and aid to the suffering; and
promoting equality, justice, and hope. The church has sought to bring the light of Christ
into the darkest places. All this has been possible because of God's Spirit working in and
among the community of believers who, together, encourage one another to become more
like Christ.
10. Conclusion
Perhaps you have experienced the pressure of someone trying to force you to be someone
you are not. Sometimes, even with good intentions, our parents, pastors, reachers, and
coaches put pressure on us to be the people they want us to be. Sometimes we choose to be
someone that we are not simply to fit in with others. We say things we don't mean, dress
in a way that we don't like, or do things we normally wouldn't so others will like us. All of
this can be very damaging, making it hard to become who God wants us to be.
The good news is this: God is not trying to get you to be someone you are not. God
made you "fearfully and wonderfully" with the characteristics, personality, and gifts that
make you unique (Psalm 139:13-17). God does not create us a certain way and then try to
bend us into a totally different shape. God made every one of us in his image and he loves
us just as we are. God also knows we are broken and sinful, but he will not leave us there.
God's salvation is more than just a rescue. It's
about God restoring us to who we were made to
be, and ultimately making us like his Son, Jesus.
God desires our well-being and longs for us to
reach our full potential as human beings.
At the end of the Bible, the church is
pictured as the bride of Christ, invited to the
great marriage supper of the Lamb (Revelation
19:6-9). Fully glorified, we will be free from sin,
unleashed to glorify and worship God in all we
do. In Ephesians 5:25-27, Jesus is pictured as a
husband, who gives himself for the church so
that "he might sanctify her, having cleansed her
... so that he might present the church to himself in splendor, withour spot or wrinkle or
any such thing, that she might be holy and without blemish." For those who follow Jesus,
this is our destiny.
However, be warned. God's love is so strong that he will nor give up on us until ve
have reached that goal. That means that sometimes he will get our artention in loud
ways, going against our selfish plans and calling us our of our apachy. Furthermore, the
CHAPTER 14 | 199


<!-- page-7 (book p.201) -->

life he calls us to will not be easy. If we follow the way of Jesus, we must count the cost.
Following Jesus will require service and sacrifice, living in hope and clinging to God's
promises even when it seems that all has gone wrong. But following Jesus also leads to
a life of fullness and joy (Psalm 16:11, John 10:10). As we become more like Christ, we
experience more and more of what God intended for us. This is the path that leads to true
self-discovery and glorification as we are conformed to Christ.
So then, God invites us to follow Jesus and be like him, so that we can glorify God
in all we do. But how do we do this? How do we become who God made us to be? As
we have said, this is primarily the work of the Holy Spirit in us. But God invites us to
participate in that work. In the next chapter, we'll explore some practices that can help
form us into people who truly love God and others.
ENDNOTES
'C. S. Lewis, Prince Caspian: The Return to Narnia (New York: HarperCollins, 1951), 218.
'See Richard Bauckham, Jesus and the Eyewitnesses: The Gospels as Eyewitness Testimony, 2nd ed. (Grand
Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 2017).
Justin S. Holcomb, Know the Heretics (Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2014), 55-61.
"Michael J. Wilkins, The NIV Application Commentary: Matthew (Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2004),
254-55. See also R. T. France, The New International Commentary on the New Testament: The Gospel of
Matthew (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 2007), 228-29.
'For an account of Jesus' way of leadership, in contrast to the ways of the world, see Eugene H. Peterson, The
Jesus Way: A Conversation on the Ways that Jesus Is the Way (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 2007).
•Holcomb, Know the Heretics, 87-98.
"Andreas J. Köstenberger, Encountering John: The Gospel in Historical, Literary, and Theological Perspective, 2nd
ed. (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2013), 132.
"Jay Y. Kim, "Hope Is an Expectant Leap," Christianity Today, November 20, 2020, https://www.
christianitytoday.com/ct/2020/november/advent-hope-is-expectant-leap.html
°G. K. Chesterton, Orthodoxy (Peabody, MA: Hendrickson, 2006), 61-76.
1°Robin Gallaher Branch, "Martha: A Remarkable Disciple," Biblical Archaeology Society, June 21, 2021,
https://www.biblicalarchaeology.org/daily/martha-a-remarkable-disciple/
"The letters of the New Testament were originally addressed to specific communities facing specific issues.
The writers do not always spell out exactly what the issues were. For this reason, scholars try to infer from
the letters what the situation was at each church, but the solutions are not always clear or definitive. For
introductory information about each of these churches see, Andreas J. Köstenberger, L. Scott Kellum, and
Charles L. Quarles, The Cradle, the Cross, and the Crown: An Introduction to the New Testament (Nashville:
B&H Publishing Group, 2009).
"Dallas Willard, The Divine Conspiracy: Rediscovering Our Hidden Life in God (New York: HarperCollins,
1997), 125.
200 | CHAPTER 14
FOUNDATIONS 5
Walking with
God
1. Spiritual Disciplines For What?
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to explain the purpose of spiritual disciplines.
Throughout the centuries, Christians have placed great value on spiritual disciplines like
Bible reading, prayer, worship, and fasting —to name just a few. Spiritual disciplines are
habies and practices that help form us to be more like Jesus. They are actions that invite us
into a deeper relationship with God so that we can know God more intimately. Central to
this is the truth that God desires a loving relationship with each person Ephesians 3:14-19,
1 Peter 3:18, 1 John 3:1). Spiritual disciplines help us in our journey to know God more
truly and shape us into the people he created us to be that is, people who are like jesus,
loving God and others!
