# Chapter 16

<!-- page-1 (book p.16) -->

Walking with God
in Community
1. The Christian Life in Community
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to critique Simeon Stylites' model of spiritual
solitude in relation to the Christian's need to be in community.
In the fifth century, in Syria, a man named Simeon Stylites often found people getting in
the way of his spiritual practice. He might have said, like many people do today, "I love
Jesus, but not the church." Simeon was known for his extreme religious devotion, but he
often inflicted punishments on his body and nearly starved himself to death because he
wrongly thought this would make him more like Christ. The
people around him objected to these practices, so he was asked to
leave his monastery.
Simeon set out on his own, but it was not long before crowds
of people came to observe his religious fervor and ask his advice.
Seeking to escape them and have more time to pray, Simeon
ascended a pillar that he found among some ancient ruins. He
built a small platform on top of the pillar and remained there for
the next 37 years of his life, coming down only occasionally to
receive food or to raise the pillar even higher (eventually reaching
at least 50 feet high). Fully exposed to the elements, standing
ST. SIVEON STYLITES, HERMIT OF THE PILLAR
constantly to pray, and eating only once a week, Simeon soon
attracted large crowds who gathered around his pillar to hear his sermons and learn from
him. He became famous and many people set out to imitate him!
If you think about it, Simeon's methods in search of solitude are not consistent with
Scripture. By leaving the monastery, he wouldn't have to listen to other believers or figure
out how to live with difficult people in community. He wouldn't be troubled by the
problems of his next-door neighbor. He would also seem to have a clear way of measuring
his own spirituality. Yet Simeon soon discovered that he couldn't escape people. Notable as
Simeon's devotion to Christ was, any form of Christian spirituality that encourages us to
permanently withdraw from others or to inflict harm on ourselves is dangerous and short-
sighted. Tempting as it may be to try and escape people, it is only with them that we can
become the people Christ has called us to be (John 13:34-35).
In the last chapter, we surveyed several spiritual disciplines or practices that help us
develop as Christ followers. These
practices are important for each of us
individually, but each is also meant
to be practiced in community or to
prepare us for our life in community.
In this chapter, we want to explore
how we become like Christ side by
side with other Christians. As we go
along, we'll see that following Jesus
in community-that is, being part of
the life of a local church-matters.
Because the church is filled with
sinful people, we might sometimes
feel it hinders our growth. But the
church is the training ground where we may be sanctified and formed to be like Christ.
It can be a place where we give and receive encouragement, comfort, and support to one
another as we seek to follow Jesus.
CHAPTER 16 | 217
© Walking with God in Community


<!-- page-2 -->

2. Worship in Community
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to describe the elements of christian worship in
community.
Since the earliest days of the church, it has been common for believers to gather at least
once a week to worship God together. The term worship is often used as a synonym for
this weekly gathering. Though most Protestant churches meet on Sunday, Scripture is
not particular about which day of the week we meet (Romans
14:5); but it is particular that Christians gather on a regular basis
(Hebrews 10:25).
The form of many modern church services is derived from
ancient tradition. The second century Christian apologist Justin
Martyr described a typical worship service:
And on the day called Sunday, all who live in the cities or in
the country gather together in one place and the memoirs of
the apostles [the gospels] or the writings of the prophets are
read. ... The president [leader or pastor] verbally instructs,
and exhorts to the imitation of these good things. Then we all
rise together and pray.... When our prayer is ended, bread
and wine and water are brought, and the president... offers
prayers and thanksgivings ... and there is a distribution to
each. ... And they who are well-to-do, and willing, give what
each thinks fit; and what is collected is deposited with the
president, who ... takes care of all who are in need.?
Though Justin did not specifically mention singing, Pliny, a
non-Christian writer from the same era, noted that Christians
gathered on a specific day to recite a hymn (which may refer to
a creed or psalm) and say an oath.* In the next several sections, we'll
explore how each of the elements listed by Justin and Pliny plays a role
1C3.
S JUSTIN
Justin Martyr, Great
St. Mary's Church,
Cambridge, United
Kingdom
in forming believers in Christlikeness. Let's begin with worship.
Upon entering a church building, one is often confronted with various symbols,
banners, images, and artwork. These elements are designed to draw our attention to some
aspect of God's character, beauty, holiness, or majesty; an event in biblical history; or
the example of a faithful Christian witness. In addition, some churches are designed to
direct our attention toward God (arches are a common way of achieving this. Through
architecture and art, "the entire building" can be "a book in which the mysteries of faith
[are] reflected," drawing us into the worship and adoration of God.
Most church services include worship through song. Expressing praise, thanksgiving,
petitions, and lament to God through song has its grounding in the Old Testament.
In addition to the psalms (many of which were composed for congregational worship,
there are numerous instances of God's people breaking out in song in response to
something God did (Exodus 15:1-21, Deuteronomy 32:1 - 43, 2 Chronicles 20:21).
218 | CHAPTER 16
Christians today are also inheritors of a rich tradition of hymn writing from people like
Charles westcy and ranny Cross. In the last nity yeats, many new songs have been
written for modern worship.
The songs we sing in church should express heartfelt adoration for God, sound
Christian theology, praise, thanksgiving, and honest lamentation. Worship is about
responding to what the pilling, not both we to doing so. Some worshippers
will lift their hands, clap, or sway, while others who are less expressive simply stand and
sing. Worshipping with other believers helps form us in Chrislikeness by inviting us
to remember and reflect on who God is and what he has done for us as a community.
Worshipping helps us to grow in gratitude and thankfulness.
3. Studying Scripture in Community
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to discuss the value of worship services and small
groups.
Today, many people have easy access to a Bible. This is a great gift, but it also comes with
a potential hazard. If we are not careful, our Christian faith can become a private affair-
just me, Jesus, and the Bible. But no one is an infallible interpreter of Scripture. As we
read the Bible, we will inevitably make mistakes, misunderstand, or read our own ideas
into the text. This is why it is so important to read and study Scripture in community.
In the earliest days of the church, most people's only access to Scripture was through
public readings during the worship service, which would have included the letters of the
apostles. Such readings allowed people to hear God's words directly. Many churches today
continue this tradition by including a specific time during the service to read passages from
the Old and New Testaments.
The reading of Scripture is often followed by the preaching of a sermon, also called a
message or homily, to help the congregation understand God's Word and live it out (see
Nehemiah 8, Acts 2:14 41). The pastor or speaker's job is not just to talk abour the Bible,
but to help people hear and respond to the
voice of God in Scripture. For this reason, the
sermon is not a one-way communication. It is a
communal activity that requires our pondering,
investigation, and response (Acts 17:11).
Throughout Scripture, God's people are
called to keep his word present with them at all
times—to meditate upon it and to use it to teach
one another (Joshua 1:8, Psalm 1:2, Colossians
3:16). One way of doing this is through small
groups, also known as cell, community, or
fellowship groups. Small groups usually meet as
Sunday school classes at church or in members
homes. They gather on a reguy pasis to discuss a book of the Bible, the latest sermon, or
another Christian book. These meetings offer encouragement and support as people seck
CHAPTER 16 | 219
© Walking with God in Community


<!-- page-3 -->

to understand and apply God's Word. Small groups can also provide an opportunity for us
to meet with people who can challenge our thinking and help us read and interpret better.
While most small groups take place as part of the ministry of a local church, those offered
by parachurch ministries in various settings bring people with different perspectives
together to study the Word.
By studying the creeds of the church and the confessions, catechisms, doctrines, or
statements of faith of churches or denominations, you can see the results and benefits
of Scripture study in community. Creeds help
Christians grasp fundamental aspects of the
faith; confessions clarify what a particular group
teaches about various biblical doctrines; and
catechisms provide short, memorable questions
and answers about Christian truth (accompanied
by Scripture references. In addition to these,
thousands of books have been written about
Scripture, which can help illuminate how
Christians throughout time and place have
interpreted God's Word.
As we read and study Scripture together, we
can grow in humility, patience, and charity. We recognize that those who have gone before
us and those around us have valuable things to teach us. Together, we have a much better
chance of interpreting correctly, internalizing, and living God's Word. And as we read our
"family story," we discover our true identity and what a Jesus-following community should
look like.
4. Prayer in Community and Exercise of Spiritual
Gifts
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to explain the importance of prayer and the
appropriate use of spiritual gifts.
Prayer was one of the hallmarks of the early church (Acts 1:14, 2:42). Praying together
with others is a powerful expression of our faith in God and shapes us in profound ways.
As we pray together, we grow in unity with one another (it is difficult to be angry with
someone that you are regularly praying with or for). Praying helps us practice putting the
needs of others before our own. It teaches us to depend on God and pay attention to how
he is at work in our communities and in the world at large.
Community prayer can happen in small groups where individuals regularly meet to
encourage and pray for each other. Community prayer can also happen during the church
service through prayers read together by the congregation or through open time for
spontaneous prayers. Some churches allow for time in which people can share their prayer
requests with the whole church. Together, we should pray for those who are lost (Romans
10:1), those in positions of authority (1 Timothy 2:1-4), the sick (James 5:14-16), those
sharing the gospel abroad (2 Corinthians 1:11), and all believers (Ephesians 6:18).
Another way that we grow in Christ is by serving one another with our spiritual
building up of believers.
gifts. A spiritual gift is a God-given ability or strength exercised for the encouragement and
Some of the spiritual gifts listed in Scripture are prophecy, service, teaching,
encouragement, generosity, leadership, mercy (Romans 12:3-8); wisdom, knowledge
faith, healing, miracles, discernment, speaking in tongues, and interpreting tongues
(1 Corinthians 12:1-11, 28-31); and apostleship, evangelism, and shepherding (Ephesians
4:7-12). There are four things that Scripture emphasizes about these spiritual gifts.
First, each gift is exactly that — a gift. Though we can cultivate them, they are not
abilities that we develop through our own strength. "They are," as one ancient theologian
said, "visible signs that the grace of the Holy Spirit is at work in the faithful"
Second, spiritual gifts are not given for self promotion, showing off, or private
indulgence. They are to be used for the encouragement and building up of the church
(Ephesians 4:12, 1 Corinthians 12:7).
Third, every Christian has one or more spiritual gifts, and no one spiritual gift is more
important than another. In 1 Corinthians 12, Paul explains that each person in a church is
like a part of the body. Just as the body needs each part in order to function properly, the
body of Christ needs each individual member.
Some will exercise their gifts in public in
preaching, teaching, singing, or leading, while
others will exercise them behind the scenes
through acts of mercy or service. But all have
their gifts from the same Spirit and are to use
them in service of one another.
Finally, spiritual gifts must be exercised in
an appropriate, loving, and orderly fashion
o spiritual gift:
a God-given
ability or strength
exercised for the
encouragement
and building up
of believers
(1 Corinthians 14). This doesn't mean there
is no room for spontaneity, but that there
should be order to ensure spiritual gifts do not
distract people but instead build them up.
By praying together and exercising our spiritual gifts for the sake of the church, we
grow up in maturity. We learn together what it looks like to be a community that loves one
another, and in so doing, proclaims the gospel to the world.
5. Confession, Accountability, Mentoring
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to relate the significance of confession,
accountability partners, and spiritual mentors.
In Christ, we are new creations (2 Corinchians 5:17, being renewed daily by God's Spirit
2 Corinthians 4:16). However, because we are not yet perfect, we need confession and
repentance. To confess is to acknowledge our sin and be honest about the ways that we have
failed to love God and others. To repent is to turn from our sin and follow a diferent way.
CHAPTER 16 | 221
220 | CHAPTER 16
FOUNDATIONS G
S Walking with God in Community


<!-- page-4 -->

Turning from sin can be slow, hard work. That's why we need the support and
encouragement of other believers. James urges us to confess our sins and to pray for
one another (James 5:16), while Hebrews calls us to
encourage one another so that no one becomes hardened
& accountability partner:
a person who
commits to
listen, pray,
encourage, ask
hard questions, and share
spiritual concerns
in sin (Hebrews 3:13). It is important to bring our sins
into the light; otherwise, we can become trapped in
them. As long as our sin is concealed, we cannot get
help (Proverbs 28:13). Confessing our sins to each other
allows us to repent and seek accountability.
Some churches make space for individual confession
before Sunday worship. Others incorporate time in the
Sunday service for corporate confession. In corporate
confession, people usually confess their sins silently to
God. This is then followed by a prayer said aloud by the whole congregation.
We all need spiritual companions to aid us in our battle against sin. One relationship
that many people find helpful is that of an accountability partner—a person who commits
to listen, pray, encourage, ask hard questions, and share spiritual concerns, such as questions
about your struggles, and sometimes sharing his or her own struggles also.
An accountability partner should be someone of your same gender who is trustworthy,
will listen carefully to you, and commit to pray with you on a regular basis. Members of
a small group can commit to being accountability partners. But accountability meetings
should not be like a visit to the doctor's office where your accountability partner simply
ticks off several embarrassing questions: Did you lust this week? Have you lied today?
While an accountability partner should challenge you in your walk with Christ, they
should not shame you for sinning but help you by asking more inviting questions: How
have you been experiencing temptation? How is your relationship with your mom going?
An accountability partner can be a peer, but it is also wise to seek out older Christians
who have greater wisdom and experience.
Another important relationship is that of a spiritual mentor—a person, usually of the
same gender as you, who is an older companion who provides wisdom and encouragement in
a specific area.
Mentors can help you to grow in a spiritual discipline, understand a job or career, or
learn more about a particular
subject. The best mentors are
good listeners, not just people
who like to dish out advice.
Mentoring relationships should
not be entered into hastily.
First, discuss with your parents
and pastor who might be
someone in your congregation
& spiritual mentor:
an older companion
who provides
wisdom and
encouragement
in a specific
area
that could be a good mentor
or you, then ask that person if he or she would be willing to meet with you to discuss the
possibility of forming a mentoring relationship with dear boundaries?
God wants us to grow in community. We worship, study, and pray togecher, serve each
other with spiritual gitts; and challenge each other to grow in church, in small groups.
and through accountability partners and spiritual mentors. There is wisdom in havin
6:1-10, Ephesians 4:15-16).
many counselors (Proverbs 11:14, 15:22, 27:17) and in seking, together, to grov (Galatians
6. Baptism and Communion
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to explain the purpose of baptism and
communion.
Two significant ways that we worship God together are through the sacraments of
baptism and communion. (Some churches call these ordinances rather than sacraments.)
At their most basic level, baptism and communion tell a story about what God has done,
is doing, and will do. By participating in them we proclaim our faith to one another and
experience God's grace afresh. That is why
Augustine called them "visible form|s] of an
invisible grace."' Sacraments are powerful
representations of God's grace and goodness in
our lives.
In Matthew 28:19-20, Jesus told his
o baptism:
a sacrament that symbolizes
dying to sin and rising with
Christ
disciples to go into the whole world, making
disciples, "baptizing them in the name of the
Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit."
Baptism is a sacrament that symbolizes dying
to sin and rising wih Christ. The word baptism
comes from the Greek word baptizo, which
means to dip or submerge. Those being baptized
are dipped in the water, or water is poured or sprinkled over them. Baptism also hearkens
back to the story of the Exodus when God rescued the people of Israel from slavery and
took them through the waters of the Red Sea (Exodus 14). Like the Israelites, Christians
have been freed from slavery to sin and brought through the water into new life in Christ
(Romans 6:3-7).
Baptism retells the salvation story and is a public declaration of our new identity as
God's people.!° It is not just a ritual. It is the beginning of our journey of following jesus,
the defining moment proclaiming our true identity." In a sense, barism is a daily afair.
Each day, through the power of the Holy Spirit living inside us, we die to sin and rise
again to our new life in Christ.
Communion is also known as the Eucharist (from the Greek eucharistia, meaning
thanksgiving) or the Lord's Supper. On the last night before his arrest, Jesus held a meal with
his disciples. He took bread and wine, blessed them, and declared that they were his body
and blood, broken and poured out for the forgiveness of sins (Mathew 26:26-28). Jesus
CHAPTER 16 | 223
222 | CHAPTER 16
5 Walking with God in Community


<!-- page-5 -->

Last Supper,
1816 mosaic
by Giacomo
Raffaeli
imitating
Leonardo da
Vinci's work,
Vienna, Austria
instructed his disciples to take communion, which is a sacrament to commemorate the body
and blood of Jesus given for the forgiveness of sins. Paul said that in taking communion we
proclaim Christ's death (1 Corinthians 11:23-26). By giving his body and blood for us on
the cross, Jesus opened the way to eternal life.
That is why he can say that his body and blood
are truly food and drink (John 6:55-58).
Normally, communion happens in church
on a weekly or monthly basis. Believers receive
a small piece of bread and a sip of wine or
grape juice (symbolizing the body and blood
of Christ). Communion is a time of solemn
remembrance, but it is also a celebration in
• communion: a sacrament to
commemorate the body and
blood of Jesus given for the
forgiveness of sins
which we receive God's loving grace. Taking
communion assumes that we are in communion
(or fellowship) with other Christians. If we
are willfully living in sin against God or our
neighbor and still taking communion, we are
not taking Jesus' sacrifice seriously. That is
why communion is typically preceded by a time for the confession of sin (1 Corinthians
11:28). One good reason for taking communion often is to encourage forgiveness and
reconciliation in the church.
7. Giving and Service
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to express how giving and serving meet the needs
of our community.
One of the distinctive marks of early Christian communities was generosity. Acts 2:44-45
describes how Christians shared all their possessions, even selling their property and
using the money to give to those who were in need. The apostles also collected funds
to distribute to widows and other impoverished people. For example, while Paul was
traveling, he visited several churches and collected funds for poor Christians in Jerusalem.
Those who had plenty, he said, should gladly supply those in need; and if circumstances
changed, those who received should also give back. Paul's goal was for self-sacrificing
generosity to be standard among the believers, but he did not coerce anyone to give. He
encouraged them to give cheerfully out of the fullness of their hearts. He promised that
those who gave would also receive-that God would supply all their needs (1 Corinthians
16:1-4, 2 Corinthians 8:1-9:15, Romans 15:14-32).
Since that time, it has been common for churches to collect tithes and offerings. The
tithe has its grounding in the Old Testament, when Abraham gave 10 percent of the
goods he won in battle to the priest Melchizedek (Genesis 14:18-20). This tithe preceded
the Law given to Moses, which specified tithes for the priesthood (Numbers 18:21),
feasts (Deuteronomy 14:22-27), and the poor (Deuteronomy 14:28-29), as well as other
offerings. Following Jewish custom, many Christians tithe 10 percent of their income, yet
his amount is not specifically mandated in the New Testament. Of greater importance is
our mindset when we give. James wrote that every good gift is from God (Tames 1.17
We are to be generous with the gifts God has given to us, freely giving to those in need
The church must steward tithes and offerings responsibly. In Paul's collection,
trustworthy individuals were selected by the church to distribute the gifts (2 Corinthians
3:16-24). It is just as important today for the church to have wise and qualiGed people
overseeing the use of funds so that there is no mismanagement. Church funds can be
used in various ways— paying the pastors and staff (1 Corinthians 9:7-11, Galatians
6:6), funding church programing and the upkeep of church property, supporting church
planting and missionaries, and giving to local charities or community organizations that
There are many more ways to give than simply offering money. Assuming only money
is necessary can be destructive and condescending to the people we are trying to help!?
Instead, we can look for ways to help others develop their own skills and talents, bolstering
their self-confidence and restoring their sense of self-worth and dignity. In addition to
money, we can give of our time and abilities. We can advocate for others and use the
influence we have on their behalf.
Meeting the needs of our community provides the
opportunity for all of us to use our God-given gifts to serve
one another. We do this in different ways. In the early
church, the apostles appointed deacons to oversee the needs
of the community, especially those of widows and others
who could not provide for themselves (Acts 6:1-7). Many
churches today have special ministry teams, which mobilize
individuals to use their gifts to help others. Some examples
include: spending time with those who need comfort or
encouragement, doing yard work for the sick or elderly,
visiting people who are in the hospital or stuck at home, or
volunteering to help with community service.
In giving of ourselves and stewarding God's gifts wisely,
Christians participate in God's story, growing together and
modeling God's redemptive love to the world.
8. Sharing the Gospel
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to give examples of how to share the gospel.
After every worship service, the congregation is sent back out into the word to be a light
for Chris. Every believer is called to make disciples (Matthew 28:19-20). We do this
individually at home, school, and work, but also together with other believers. How exactly
do we do this? St. Francis is often credited wich saying, "Preach the gospel, and when
necessary, use words." Tho Wesses unlikely that St. Francis actually said this, the statement
has some merit. The point is thons that an also preach the gospel through our actions.
CHAPTER 16 / 225
224 | CHAPTER 16
FOUNDATIONS
9 Walking with God in Community


<!-- page-6 -->

Giotto's fresco
of St. Francis
speaking to
the birds in the
Basilica of San
Francesco in the
heart of Assisi
226 | CHAPTER 16
The way we live our lives with other believers should be attractive to those outside the
faith. In fact, Jesus explicitly said that unbelievers would be able to identify Christians
by their love for one another (John 13:35). In other words, the way that we treat other
Christians-being generous, serving, and forgiving one another— should be a testimony
to the transforming love of Jesus at work in our communities. We love because he first
loved us (1 John 4:19). The early church father Tertullian wished that unbelievers would
look at Christians and say, "Look [at] how they love one another... and how they are
ready to die for each other" 13
Our lives should demonstrate love not only toward believers, but to everyone around
us, including our enemies (Matthew 5:44).
Jesus taught that we are to treat everyone
as we ourselves would like to be treated
(Luke 6:31). One way to love others and
share the gospel with them is by serving
your neighborhood and community. Many
churches do this by offering meals and
shelter to the homeless, providing aid to
refugees, and organizing community service
days. By doing these things, we show that
the gospel is not just about the afterlife. We
show that God cares about neighborhoods
and communities, as well as every individual
person.
While our actions on their own can raise
the curiosity of unbelievers, they need to be accompanied by words. Ultimately, faith
comes through hearing the message about Jesus (Romans 10:17), so we must offer that
message to others. Christ's love compels us to do this (2 Corinthians 5:14). We can use our
words to share about Jesus and then invite others to follow him. The best way to go about
this is to make friends with those outside the faith. Invite them into your house, get to
know them, and show genuine interest in them. We don't do this to try and convert them,
but to show them the love that Jesus showed us. We cannot save anyone. It is the Holy
Spirit who does the work of conversion in a person's heart. But he empowers us to share
our testimony with others (Acts 1:8).
The privilege of sharing the gospel is enormous, but the opportunities are endless.
That's why various parachurch organizations have been created. These Christian
organizations come alongside the church and assist in sharing the good news. For example,
the Salvation Army provides relief for the homeless, Compassion International supports
children in impoverished countries, Gideons International distributes Bibles all over
the world, The Navigators aid Christians in sharing their faith, and Summit Ministries
provides worldview and apologetics training to help students defend and commend the
faith. Many others could be listed.
As we have seen throughout this book, the gospel is indeed our personal salvation,
yet it also includes the eventual restoration of all creation. That's why the gospel must be
proclaimed in word and deed. Both are necessary for faithful Christian witness.
FOUNDATIONS G
9. The Positive Impact of the Church on Society
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to identify four specific ways the church has
positively impacted society.
When the Spirit is at work among believers who are seeking to follow lesus together
incredible things can happen. Throughout the centuries, the church has had a positive
impact on society. Let's highlight four ways in which this has happened.
Caring for the Sick and Impoverished. When plagues hit Rome in the second and
third centuries, many pagan priests and doctors fled the city, leaving the sick to die Bur
Christians cared for their sick neighbors even those who did not believe in Jesus." The
church became known for its good deeds, which were shocking to the Romans. In AD 362,
the emperor Julian complained to a pagan priest that Christians "support not only their
poor, but ours as well"s During the Middle Ages, the Christian concern for the poor
and downtrodden led to the founding of many hospitals and shelters. Today, Christians
continue to be heavily involved in medical care and poverty relief.
Honoring and Protecting Women and Children. In ancient Roman culture, men had
absolute power in the household. They could divorce their wives, force them to have
abortions, and even have them killed. Male children were prized, so families often kept
only the oldest female child (other girl babies would be left
on the streets to die). In this situation, the Christian teaching
that both women and men are God's image-bearers was
revolutionary. Christians rejected abortion and infanticide.
Instead, they took in abandoned infants. Because the
church valued them, women converted to Christianity
at a far higher rate than men and served in positions of
leadership! The church also required that husbands be
faithful to and love their wives (1 Corinthians 7:1-16,
Ephesians 5:25).
Promoting Culture and Education. The Christian
duty to love God with all one's heart, soul, mind, and
strength (Luke 10:27) has fueled the desire for learning
and education. Throughout the centuries, monks and nuns
gathered together in monasteries and convents to devote
themselves to God. They helped preserve ancient writings,
both Christian and otherwise. During the Middle Ages,
numerous schools and universities were opened for the study
of theology and philosophy. Christian scholars also laid the groundwork for the endeavors
of modern science. In addition, Christian artists were inspired to create for God's glory,
leaving behind some of the most magnificent examples of artwork, sculpture, music, and
architecture in the world.
CHAPTER 16 / 227
G Walking with God in Community


<!-- page-7 -->

Pursuing Racial Unity. Ever since the fal, wherever there have been people, there has
been prejudice of one kind or another. Sadly, this has even happened in church settings.
But the belief that all people bear God's image has led Christians to fight against prejudice
(Romans 10:12-13, Galatians 3:28, Colossians 3:11). One example of this was in Rwanda
in 1994, when racial prejudice between the Hutu and Tutsi people in that country led to
a genocide of the Tutsi people. Almost 30 years later, Rwanda has demonstrated to the
world the incredible power of forgiveness and the possibility of unity and healing. The
Rwandan church plays a key role in this process.!® Another example is from the United
States. In 2015, a White supremacist murdered nine Black people during a Bible study
at the Emanuel African Methodist Episcopal Church in Charleston, South Carolina.
Confronting the murderer later in court, many members of the church openly forgave him
and expressed how they were praying for him." Though there is still much to be done, this
tragedy has led to attempts to heal racial divides in the churches in Charleston.
These examples show how Christians have followed Jesus together and have left the
world a better place. In and through them, the power of the gospel was evident to all. May
the same be said of us.
10. Conclusion
Every week, Christians all over the world gather together in fields, homes, and church
buildings to worship God through song, study of Scripture, preaching, prayer, confession,
communion, and giving. Your school may have worship services too. In many of these
gatherings, people regularly confess the Nicene Creed, which includes this line: "I believe
in one holy catholic and apostolic church." (The
word catholic here refers to the universal church.)
The idea of the universal church is this: despite the
multiplicity of denominations, doctrinal variations,
and cultural expressions, there is ultimately only one
church, composed of all those who follow Jesus and
confess him as Lord (1 Corinthians 1:2, 12:12-13).
No believer is excluded from God's community, no
matter where they live in the world, the color of their
skin, their gender, social status, or ethnicity. All who
trust Jesus are a part of God's community.
In the church, the Holy Spirit calls together
broken people-sinners in need of redemption-and
transforms them into a new people who love God and
others. It is inevitable that in diverse communities
of fallen human beings there will be problems, challenges, and frustrations. Discouraging
as these can sometimes be, growth in the life of faith happens primarily in fellowship
with other believers (Proverbs 27:17, Hebrews 10:24-25). The nature of Scripture itself
indicates this-from the Old Testament to the New, God spoke through prophets, kings,
evangelists, and apostles directly to a community, whether it was Israel, a particular nation,
Our life in community influences the way we engage with God and others on an
individual level. By learning from other believers and worshiping together with them,
we discover new ways to follow Jesus more faithfully ourselves. In the same manner, each
individual spiritual discipline that we talked abour in Chapter 15 prepares us for our life in
community. As we are growing individually, we come
together to help and encourage one another to grow
as well (Ephesians 2:19-21; 4:15-16). Through God's
Spirit, we grow up together in Christ, becoming the
people we were intended to be—that is, people who
live holy lives and glorify God in everything.
However, like anything else, community can
become an idol. We can gather together with others
who are just like us and use community as a way of
excluding others. Another temptation is to search for
the perfect community where your gifts and talents
are appreciated, where the music suits your taste,
and the pastor is dynamic and interesting. But such a quest is dangerous and illusive; it
can cause us to become calloused toward other Christians and resistant to the work of the
Holy Spirit. We must remember that God can always form us right where we are-even
when our church is less than ideal.
It is in the less-than-ideal places where it is often most difficult to follow Jesus' two
greatest commands—love God and love your neighbor. So, before we close this book, we
need to explore what love means and what it looks like when we live it out.
228 | CHAPTER 16
ENDNOTES
"Simeon Stylites," New World Encyclopedia, https://www.newworldencyclopedia.org/entry/Simeon_Srylites.
"Simeon's excesses do not invalidate all monastic endeavors. In the fourth century, faced with increasing
corruption in church and society, many Christians fled to the deserts to seek God in solitude and engage in
more intense discipleship. They practiced asceticism, though occasionally to an extreme, unhealthy degree.
However, it quickly became apparent that solitude, though an important practice, was not a good condition
in which to live permanently. For this reason, small communities of men and women formed in order to foster
greater devotion to God. Even among solitary monks, it was common to gather together at least once a week.
3 Justin Martyr, The First Apology in Ante-Nicene Fathers Volume 1, 3rd edition, ed. Philip Schaff Eternal Sun
Books, 2017), 160.
*Pliny (the younger) in Documents of the Christian Church, 4th edition, ed. Henry Bettenson and Chris
Maunder (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011), 4.
Justo L. González, The Story of Christianity Volume 1: The Early Church to the Dawn of the Reformation (New
York: HarperCollins, 2010), 384.
•Harold L. Senkbeil, The Care of Souls: Cultivating a Pastor's Heart (Bellingham, VA: Lexham Press, 2019),
'Theodoret of Cyr, as quoted in Ancient Christian Commentary on Scripture: 1-2 Corinthians, ed. Gerald Bray
(Downers Grove: IVP Academic, 2006), 115.
•For more information about mentoring, see Jeff Myers, Paul Gutacker, and Page Guracker, Cultivate:
Forming the Emerging Generation through Life-on-Life Mentoring (Dayton: Passing the Baron International,
2010), and A Mentoring Guide: Chris, Conversation, Companionship (Sioux Fals, SD: VantagePoint
Ministries, 2019).
S Walking with God in Community
CHAPTER 16 | 229


<!-- page-8 (book p.230) -->

'St. Augustine, as quoted in Edwin Oliver James, "Sacrament," Encyclopedia Brittanica, https://www.
britannica.com/topic/sacrament.
1ON.T. Wright, The Way of the Lord: Christian Pilgrimage Today (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 1999), 25-33.
"Wright, 31.
12Steve Corbett and Brian Fikkert, When Helping Hurts: How to Alleviate Poverty Without Hurting the Poor...
and Yourself (Chicago: Moody Publishers, 2012), 139.
13 Tertullian, as quoted in J. Warren Smith, "See how these Christians love one another," Christian History
Institute, https://christianhistoryinstitute.org/magazine/article/see-how-these-christians-love.
"Rodney Stark, The Rise of Christianity: A Sociologist Reconsiders History (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press, 1996), 73-94.
"Julian, as quoted in Stark, 83-84.
16"Doing Life Together," Summit Ministries, reproduction rights granted by Charles Moore. September 9,
2009, https://www.summit.org/resources/articles/doing-life-together/.
Stark, 128.
18 Jonatán Soriano, "Rwanda: 25 years building forgiveness and reconciliation," Evangelical Focus, https://
evangelicalfocus.com/world/4393/rwanda-25-years-of-forgiveness-and-reconciliation.
"Mark Berman, "I forgive you.' Relatives of Charleston church shooting victims address Dylann Roof,"
The Washington Post, June 19, 2015, https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-nation/wp/2015/06/19/i-
forgive-you-relatives-of-charleston-church-victims-address-dylann-roof/.
Loving God
and Others
1. The Two Greatest Commandments
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to discuss the importance of keeping the two
greatest commandments.
"Teacher, which is the great commandment in the Law?" a lawyer once asked Jesus. His
response: "You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul and
with all your mind. This is the great and first commandment. And a second is like it: You
shall love your neighbor as yourself. On these two commandments depend all the Law
and the Prophets" (Matthew 22:36-40).
| CHAPTER 16
FOUNDATIONS 5
