# Chapter 17

<!-- page-1 (book p.231) -->

'St. Augustine, as quoted in Edwin Oliver James, "Sacrament," Encyclopedia Brittanica, https://www.
britannica.com/topic/sacrament.
1ON.T. Wright, The Way of the Lord: Christian Pilgrimage Today (Grand Rapids, Ml: Eerdmans, 1999), 25-33.
"Wright, 31.
12 Steve Corbett and Brian Fikkert, When Helping Hurts: How to Alleviate Poverty Without Hurting the Poor....
and Yourself (Chicago: Moody Publishers, 2012), 139.
1 Tertullian, as quoted in J. Warren Smith, "See how these Christians love one another," Christian History
Institute, https://christianhistoryinstitute.org/magazine/article/see-how-these-christians-love.
*Rodney Stark, The Rise of Christianity: A Sociologist Reconsiders History (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press, 1996), 73-94.
"Julian, as quoted in Stark, 83-84.
16"Doing Life Together," Summit Ministries, reproduction rights granted by Charles Moore. September 9,
2009, https://www.summit.org/resources/articles/doing-life-together/
Stark, 128.
1 Jonatán Soriano, "Rwanda: 25 years building forgiveness and reconciliation," Evangelical Focus, https://
evangelicalfocus.com/world/4393/rwanda-25-years-of-forgiveness-and-reconciliation.
'Mark Berman, "I forgive you.' Relatives of Charleston church shooting victims address Dylann Roof,"
The Washington Post, June 19, 2015, https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-nation/wp/2015/06/19/i-
forgive-you-relatives-of-charleston-church-victims-address-dylann-roof/.
Loving God
and Others
1. The Two Greatest Commandments
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to discuss the importance of keeping the two
greatest commandments.
"Teacher, which is the great commandment in the Law?" a lawyer once asked Jesus. His
response: "You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul and
with all your mind. This is the great and first commandment. And a second is like it: You
shall love your neighbor as yourself. On these two commandments depend all the Law
and the Prophets" (Matthew 22:36-40).
230 | CHAPTER 16
FOUNDATIONS S


<!-- page-2 -->

The apostle Paul said something similar:
Owe no one anything, except to love each other,
for the one who loves another has fulfilled the law.
For the commandments, "You shall not commit
adultery, You shall not murder, You shall not steal,
You shall not covet," and any other commandment,
are summed up in this word: "You shall love your
neighbor as yourself." Love does no wrong to a
neighbor; therefore love is the fulfilling of the law.
-Romans 13:8-10
Just imagine if humanity actually kept these two great commandments. Loren
Cunningham, the founder of Youth with a Mission (YWAM), spent a few pages
describing what this would look like in The Book That Transforms Nations. Here's part of
• A majority would honor God and respect each other, viewing life as God's gift.
• Every mother would treasure her unborn child, and every father would provide the
loving stability his child needs.
• Racism would be rare. Reconciliation and unity would bring all races and ethnic
groups together.
• We wouldn't have to fear violence or theft.
• Most people would protect the environment, practicing good stewardship over God's
creation.
• Child abuse and spousal abuse would all but
& philia:
love of family, friends, and
community
disappear.
• Divorce would be extremely rare.
• Politicians, officials, and judges would be
public servants, not abusers of power.
• Empty prisons would be demolished or
repurposed for other uses.
• People would speak the truth in love.
• Profanity and slander would become the
exception, not the norm.
• Road rage would be a peculiar phenomenon
for history scholars to ponder.!
This all sounds great, yet creating such a
world is not as simple as getting everyone to obey two commands. In fact, we are entirely
incapable of bringing about the world described above. Standing in our way is the problem
of sin. Each and every one of us has failed to love God and others as we ought, so we all
contribute to the ongoing mess of our world. In order to truly love God and neighbor, we
need something more than an iron will to do good or a strong commitment to obey; we
need a transformed heart. Here's the good news: through Jesus, believers have been given
new hearts and commissioned to witness to the power of God's love to heal and transform
the world. Only God can bring about the world we long for, but he wants us to anticipate
that world by demonstrating his love through the power of the Holy Spirit. In this chapter
make a difference in our world.
we'll look at what the Bible says about loving God and our neighbor and how that can
2. What Love Is
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to distinguish between four types of love.
The Bible was written mostly in two languages: Hebrew and Greek. Both of these
languages tell us about what love is and is not.
The Old Testament uses the Hebrew word for love, ahava. It is related to the root
word bau, "which means to give. This Hebrew word contains a tremendous truth: giving is
fundamental to loving.... Love is not something that simply happens to us but something
that we create through our actions when we give of ourselves to others.""
Greek, the language that the New
Testament was written in, specifies different
types of love by giving each type its own
word. Four Greek terms for love are philia,
storge, eros, and agape. Philia is love of family,
friends, and community. This type of love
refers to affectionate regard for another in a
nonsexual way. Storge means natural affection,
such as the love of parents for their children.
It might also be used for love of country or
a sports team. Eros means romantic love and
natural affection
sexual desire. It borrows its name from the
Greek god of love and sensual passion. From
eros we get the word "erotic." The Bible uses the word agape to describe the kind of love
that comes from God. Agape love is selfless, self-giving love.
The word agape is used more than 200 times in the New Testament. "Charity means
love," wrote C. S. Lewis. "It is called agape in the New Testament to distinguish it from
eros (sexual love), storge (family affection), and philia (friendship). So, there are four kinds
of love, all good in their proper place, but agape is the best because it is the kind God has
for us and is good in all circumstances."3
Lewis went on to explain that eros, philia, and storge can all become corruped if they
are not caught up in agape. Unless our loves are tempered by agape, they can become
selfishness, jealousy, bitterness, anger, and hatred. Love that does not seek the good of
another is not really love at all. That's why love is ultimately defined by God himself.
God is love, and he demonstrated to us what love really looks like. John 3:16 says that
"God so loved the world, that he gave his only Son..." God's love is proactive and self
giving. Before he was crucified, Jesus told his followers that people would know they were
Christians by the agape love they had for one another (John 13:35),.
CHAPTER 17 | 233
232 | CHAPTER 17
© Loving God and Others


<!-- page-3 -->

What does agape look like in practice? Paul
famously explained this in 1 Corinthians 13:4-7.
Love, he said, is patient and kind, not envious,
boastful, proud, dishonoring, self-seeking, or
easily angered. It does not keep a record of
wrongs or delight in evil. It rejoices in truth and
always protects, trusts, hopes, and perseveres. In
Scripture, love is more than just a feeling, It takes
work. It is a commitment to loving action for the
good of another.
6 eros:
romantic love and
sexual desire
3. Loving God
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to explain how to love God.
It is God's nature to love (1 John 4:8). When he decided to create human beings, he did
so in love, in order to adopt us through Jesus Christ (Ephesians 1:4-5). God created us
to be in relationship with him. He is a Person who cares for us, who knows our thoughts
and even how many hairs we have on our head. He desires fellowship with us (1 Peter 5:7,
Psalm 139:1-4, Matthew 10:30, Revelation 3:20). Our love for God is grounded in the
fact that he loved us first (1 John 4:19).
So, how do we go about loving God? We begin by responding to him, by seeking him
out and enjoying his company. Loving God means delighting and rejoicing in him (Psalm
37:4, Philippians 4:4). We learn to love God by just being with him, spending time in his
presence.
Some people are concerned that they don't really love God because they seldom have
warm feelings for him. Others worry that they don't really love God if they are mad at
him or are confused because their prayers are not answered the way they hoped. Though
our feelings toward God can vary (just as they
vary in any other relationship we have), loving
& agape:
selfless, self-giving love
God is not just a matter of feelings. It involves
our whole self, including our actions toward
others. Loving God goes hand in glove with
loving other people (1 John 4:7-8). John even
goes so far as to say that if we don't love others,
we can't possibly say that we love God (1 John
4:20). Loving God also means being obedient
to his commands (John 14:15, 21, 23). All of
us will inevitably fail to love and obey at times,
yet God is gracious, ready to forgive us and to
enable us to try again.
When we love God, we recognize his true worth and put him first in our lives. We
don't allow other things to crowd in and deprive us of time with him. In short, we reject
idolatry, which is the sin of worshipping anyone or anything other than God.
Idolatry is vividly portrayed in Scripture after God led the children of Israel our of
Egypt. While Moses received the Ten Commandments, his brother Aaron fashioned a
golden calf and other idols. Then, he announced, " These are your gods, O Israel, wh
brought you up out of the land of Egypt!" (Exodus 32:4. How had Arron and the
Israelites so quickly forgotten the Lord?
We might think we are superior to the Israclites because we don't usually bo down
status. One of the direst consequences of idolatry is
before physical images. However, we also construct idols out of things like money, sex, or
that we end up resembling the idols we have created.
The idols of the nations are silver and gold,
the work of human hands.
They have mouths, but do not speak;
they have eyes, but do not see;
they have ears, but do not hear,
nor is there any breath in their mouths.
Those who make them become like them,
so do all who trust in them. -Psalm 135:15-18
When we trade God for idols, we not only forget
God but become shallow, unstable, unthinking, and
uncaring —just like the things we worship. We are rescued from idolatry when we respond
to the Holy Spirit's urging to turn from sin and to recognize who God is and what he has
done for us.
4. Accepting God's Love for Us
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to relate receiving God's love to the ability to love
others.
Our love for God and others is a response to God's love for us. This means har before we
can love others, we must first receive God's love for ourselves. As one pastor explains:
The only reason you can love God or love anybody else is because God first loved you.
He showed that love by creating you. He showed that love by everyching you have in
life; i's all a gift of God's love. And he showed that love by sending Jesus Christ to
Earth to die for you. Once we're secure inside God's unconditional love, we'll start
showing others more grace. We won't be as angry as we ve been. We'l be more patient.
We'll be more forgiving. We'l be more merciful. We'll give others grace. Bur you
cannot give others something you haven' received yourself... Its impossible to love
others until you really feel loved yourself.*
When Jesus said, "You shall love your neighbor as yourself" (Mark 12:31, he assumed
that we do, in fact, love ourselves. Most people do love themselves. Loving ourselves is
natural, though self-love waxes and wanes like other felings do. But some people believe
234 | CHAPTER 17
9 Loving God and Others
Adoration of
the Golden Calf,
1633 painting by
Nicolas Poussin,
National Gallery,
London, United
Kingdom
CHAPTER 17 | 235


<!-- page-4 -->

they are too broken or sinful to be loved, or that they are worthless compared to others, or
that they are not lovable. Yet the truth is that God loves us more than we could possibly
imagine (Romans 5:8).
Romans 12:3 says that we are not to think of ourselves more highly than is warranted,
but neither are we to think of ourselves as less than God has made us. We are to
acknowledge our sinfulness while resting in our true identity as God's beloved children. We
can also ask God to help us be humble and teachable, to give us a more accurate perception
of our own character, abilities, and gifts,
and to help us gain a deeper knowledge of
his love.
As we receive God's love and are
transformed by it, we can begin to give
that love to others. This is about more than
just doing acts of love. It's about becoming
the kind of person whose natural response
is to love unselfishly. One of the ways this
happens is through our habits. We can
cultivate a life of love through what we
habitually do. We can spend time with God, experiencing his care for us and learning to
receive his love. We can practice seeing ourselves as God sees us. He sees all our flaws, and
yet he has compassion on us. We can also consider others' interests in addition to our own
and put them first (Philippians 2:3-4).
John Stonestreet, president of the Colson Center, recommends asking four questions to
connect our love for God with the life habits that will personally help us to flourish:
• What are my loves? What do I care about most deeply based on how I use my time,
talents, and treasure?
• What are my loyalties? Who or what gets the real me? What causes me to commit
my time and energies?
• What are my longings? Toward what am I aiming my life? What is success? If I
continue where I have aimed, where will I end up? What am I thinking about in my
private moments?
• What are my liturgies? (Liturgies is a fancy theological term for the rhythms of life).
What do I worship? What are the habits of my life?
Asking these questions, and remembering the disciplines discussed in Chapters 15-16,
will help us discern the habits that shape what we love so we can grow in love for God,
ourselves, and others.
5. Loving Others
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to give examples of ways Jesus demonstrated
love.
We have seen that in order to love at all, we must cultivate a loving relationship with God
and accept God's love for ourselves. Then, that love can flow freely from us to others.
236 | CHAPTER 17
FOUNDATIONS 5
and humble sacrince. Consider a dozen ways Jesus demonstrated love:
What does this love look like? It looks like Jesus agape love, characterized by seltless giving
• Jesus spent time with others. He invested three years of his life with 12 disciples and
had close relationships with others (Luke 6:12-16, 8:1-3; John 115).
• Jesus listened. He paid attention to people and responded to them with compassion
(Matthew 15:21-28; Mark 7:24-30, Luke 7:1-10, John 4:1 42).
• Jesus served others. He was intent on ministering to the crowds who followed him
(Matthew 4:23-25), Washing feet was a job reserved for the lowest of slaves, bur Jesus
humbly took on this role at the Last Supper (John 13:1-17). Even after he rose from
the grave, he made breakfast for his disciples (John 21:9-13).
• Jesus grieved over human sinfulness and suffering. He grieved with others and
experienced their pain (Matthew 23:37-39, Luke 13:10-13, John 11:33-36).
• Jesus told the truth. He didn't lie. He was honest with his fans, foes, friends, family,
and heavenly Father (Matthew 26:25, 39; Mark 10:17-22, 15:34; Luke 2:48-51,
8:19-21; John 10:31-32, 21:15-19).
• Jesus honored women and children. In a society where women and children were
treated as second-class citizens, Jesus persistently valued them (Matthew 18:3, 19:14;
Mark 1:30-31, 5:35-43, 14:3-9; Luke 10:38-42; John 8:1-11).
• Jesus advocated for the poor. He condemned the neglect and abuse of the poor in
society (Luke 11:39-42, 14:12-14, 16:19-25).
• Jesus treated outsiders with kindness and respect. He
wasn't afraid to talk to prostitutes, social outcasts, tax
collectors, or Roman soldiers (Luke 7:1-10, 38-50,
17:11-19, 19:1-10).
• Jesus gave his life for us. He suffered the ultimate
punishment in our place so that he might bring us into
right relationship with God (John 15:12, Philippians 2:8,
1 Peter 3:18).
• Jesus forgave his enemies. He was not plotting his
revenge on the cross. Instead, he begged mercy for those
who sought to kill him (Luke 23:34).
• Jesus empowered others. Jesus trained his followers;
he also had them put their training to use (Luke 10:1,
16-17). He promised they would do great works for God's glory and commissioned
them to be his witnesses (John 14:12, Acts 1:8).
• Jesus prayed for others. He prayed constantly. He prayed for the apostles and also
for those who would believe in him later (John 17:20). He is sill praying for us
(Romans 8:34, Hebrews 7:25).
When we consider the many ways Jesus loved others, we see just how tall an order h
gave us: "This is my commandment, that you love one another as I have loved you" (John
15:12). God's agape has been "poured into our hearts through the Holy Spirit who has
been given to us" (Romans 5:5), so we are empowered to love and to consider how to si
up one another to love and good works" (Hebrews 10:24).
G Loving God and Others
CHAPTER 17 | 237


<!-- page-5 -->

6. Who Is My Neighbor?
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to summarize what loving your neighbor means.
According to Scripture, loving our neighbors is not optional. It is expected of God's
people. In Leviticus, God spells out the responsibilities that the people of Israel had toward
one another (emphasis added):
You shall not oppress your neighbor or rob him. The wages of a hired worker shall not
remain with you all night until the morning. You shall not curse the deaf or put a
stumbling block before the blind, but you shall fear your God: I am the LoRD.
You shall do no injustice in court. You shall not be partial to the poor or defer to the
great, but in righteousness shall you judge your neighbor. You shall not go around as
a slanderer among your people, and you shall not stand up against the life of your
neighbor: I am the LORD.
You shall not hate your brother in your heart, but you shall reason frankly with your
neighbor, lest you incur sin because of him. 18 You shall not take vengeance or bear
a grudge against the sons of your own people, but you shall love your neighbor as
yourself: I am the LoRD. -Leviticus 19:13-18
"And who is my neighbor?" This is a question that Jesus was once asked by a self-
righteous lawyer. Jesus' answer became known as the parable of the Good Samaritan (Luke
10:25-37). In the story, a Jewish man was beaten, robbed, and left for dead. A priest and
another Jewish man both passed by the wounded man without giving him a thought.
Then, along came a Samaritan (recall that the Jews and Samaritans were bitter enemies).
He stopped, cared for the man's wounds, and took him to an inn so that he could recover.
After relating this story, Jesus asked the lawyer, Which of these three do you think was
a neighbor to the man who fell into the hands of robbers?' The expert in the law replied,
'The one who had mercy on him.' Jesus told him, 'Go and do likewise." (Luke 10:36-37)
Jesus made it clear that neighborliness extended beyond the Israelites to Samaritans,
Romans, and other Gentiles. Neighborliness goes beyond family and tribe, beyond the
circles in which we feel most comfortable. Every person is our neighbor because we all share
a common humanity. So, every person should be an object of our love. This kind of radical
love is neither easy or comfortable. As one Bible commentary points out, there are risks:
The Samaritan takes on an extraordinary degree of risk to help this stranger. He risks
getting jumped by the same bandits when he stoops to see what has happened to the
man. He risks being cheated by the innkeeper. He risks being saddled by the expense
and emotional weight of caring for someone who has become chronically ill. But he
takes on these risks because he acts as if his own life were the one in question!
Tesus also addressed what it means to be a good neighbor in the Sermon on the Mount
(Matthew S-7), teaching that we are to seek peace, resolve dispures, be honest, reist
retaliation, love our enemies, and give to those in need. Jesus' sermon shows us how to treat
others based on God's goodness, love, and justice. Despite the risks, this is what we are
called to.
7. Neighborliness and Community
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to express how Christians can contribute to
building healthy communities.
One way to love our neighbors is by pursuing shalom in our local communities. Recall
that shalom is a state of peace, harmony, wholeness, prosperity, welfare, and tranquility.
Shalom grows out of the "community aspect"
of creation. Genesis 2:24 says, "Therefore a
man shall leave his father and his mother and
hold fast to his wife, and they shall become
one flesh." (The term meaning flesh in Hebrew
is basar, which also implies the idea of "clan.")
Adam and Eve became one family. Their family
ultimately expanded to include the whole human
race-from those who live next door to those
who live halfway around the world (Acts 17:26).
Many Christians follow Martin Luther's
teaching and believe that God ordained three
principal institutions: the family, the church,
and the government? Christians love their
neighbors by pursuing shalom in these institutions, as well as by working together to build
the "intermediary institutions" that make for healthy societies, such as schools, hospitals,
and other organizations offering service to the community.
The well-being of our community is not something we can ignore. The prophet
Jeremiah wrote to the Israelite captives in Babylon and instructed them to "seek the welfare
of the city where I have sent you into exile, and pray to the Lord on its behalf, for in is
welfare you will find your welfare (Jeremiah 297). Loving our communities means caring
about the well-being of everyone in them, whether they share ur faith or not.
So. how do we build strong communities? John Stonestreet, quoted earlier, frequently
asks four questions to help people identify how they can participate in this task:
CHAPTER 17 | 239
238 CHAPTER 17
FOUNDATIONS S
S Loving God and Others


<!-- page-6 -->

240 | CHAPTER 17
• What's good that we can protect, promote, and celebrate?
• What's broken that we can fix or restore?
• What's evil that we can stop?
• What's missing that we can contribute?
Answering these questions may lead us to volunteer with the local fire department
or public school, preserve historic buildings, actively fight against the use of drugs and
pornography, or build safe parks
for children. These are just a few of
the many ways we can contribute
All people are
God's image-bearers
and are worthy of
respect.
to building healthy communities.
Cooperating with others (both
Christians and non-Christians) is
necessary for getting things done
effectively and efficiently, but it
is also good in and of itself. By
working together with others, we
demonstrate God's love. Conflicts may arise about the best way to promote the well-being
of the community. Because of our sin nature and differing perspectives, we may disagree
over how to pursue our goals, who gets credit for what, who should be in charge, whether
someone is abusing power, and an endless array of other concerns. As Christians, we must
remember that all people are God's image-bearers and are worthy of respect. With this in
mind, we can and should ask God, who owns everything (Psalm 24:1), to help us to work
together with others.
8. Neighborliness and Citizenship
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to explain the concept of Christian dual citizenship
and our responsibilities as citizens of God's kingdom.
The Christian calling to love our neighbors also impacts the way we behave as citizens of
the nation in which we live. A citizen of a community, city, or nation is someone who, by
birth or naturalization, has the right to be protected by the community or state, and the
responsibility to contribute to its welfare and safety. The US Declaration of Independence
says that God gave all people rights, including "life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness."
So, US citizens expect their country will protect those rights. They also recognize that, as
citizens, they have the responsibility to vote, pay taxes, and obey the law.
Christians have dual citizenship. We are first and foremost citizens of God's kingdom—
that is, citizens of heaven. However, this does not free us from being good citizens on
Earth (Philippians 3:20, Titus 3:1-2). The rights and responsibilities of citizens vary from
one nation to another. Because of this, believers in diverse times and places, with different
types of governments, have had to discern what being a good citizen means in their
respective contexts.
One responsibility as citizens of God's kingdom is to live peaceably with others as
much as possible (Romans 12:18). This includes obeying laws, respecting and praying for
FOUNDATIONS G
local autortles, and paying taxes, while giving our ultimate allegiance to God (Matther
Another of our respons! rametles as citizens is to seek justice. God told his people
"seek justice, correct oppression, bring Justice to the tatherless, [and) plead the widow
cause" (Isaiah 1:17). Other prophets preached the same message (Hosea 12:6, Amos 5:24,
Micah 6:0, Lecharlah (:). They were recalling the principles of fairness and justice tha
were built into God's Law from the beginning (tor example, see the Ten Commandments
Exodus 20:1-17).
Being a good citizen of God's kingdom can also mean geting involved in local
and national o vernmen, whether through supporting candidates, running for office,
proposing or opposing legislation, or implementing or resisting policy. The Old Testament
stories of heroes like Joseph, Esther, Daniel, and others are instructive for us today. Our
motivation for getting involved should be to love our neighbors by bringing justice and
truth into the realms of power (Luke 6:31).
Christian citizenship requires that we live faithfully and in obedience to jesus, even
under corrupt governments or persecution. There will be times when authorities command
us to do what is evil, and when those times come, Christians must say no. But these kinds
of choices require prayer and discernment, especially with other believers.
A good example of faithful Christian
citizenship is John Woolman, a Quaker farmer
in the 1700s who came to realize that owning
slaves was wrong. He freed his slaves and set about
trying to persuade his Quaker neighbors to do the
same. Woolman didn't lecture or preach to them.
Instead, he asked questions: What does it mean to
be a person? What does it mean to own a person?
What does it mean to will a person to your
descendants as a piece of property? By the time
Woolman finished his campaign, all the Quakers
in America had released their slaves, and a good
number had joined the abolitionist cause!
Woolman, through simple persuasion,
played the part of a caring neighbor and brought freedom to thousands. In the same
way, Christian citizens today should look for creative ways to love their nation through
promoting justice.
9. Love Your Enemies
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to apply five principles for loving enemies.
It's all good and well to say, "Love your neighbor," but what if your neighbors aren't very
neighborly? What if they don't like you? What if you doni like them? What if they sek to
do you harm? How our neighbors treat us doesn't change how we are to treat them. This
the radical teaching of Jesus:
9 Loving God and Others
CHAPTER 17 | 241


<!-- page-7 -->

Martin Luther
King Jr.,
1964 Nobel
Foundation
242 | CHAPTER 17
"You have heard that it was said, You shall love your neighbor and hate your enemy?
But I say to you, Love your enemies and pray for those who persecute you, so that you
may be sons of your Father who is in heaven. For he makes his sun rise on the evil and
on the good, and sends rain on the just and on the unjust." - Matthew 5:43-45
As one writer put it, "We don't love those who hate us to get what we want or to
manipulate a situation. We do it because that's what children of heaven do."!!
The idea of treating our enemies like God does is repeated in Luke's gospel (Luke
6:27-36). This response goes counter to how we naturally want to respond to those
who despise and abuse us. But loving our enemies isn't optional for Christians. It's an
important part of following Jesus' example, as Peter reminds believers
facing persecution (1 Peter 2:21-23). It is a way of participating in the
life of God.
In his sermon titled "Loving Your Enemies," Dr. Martin Luther
King Jr. gave practical advice on how to go about this task:
• Start by looking at yourself. Some people might not like you
due to jealousy or some other reason. But others might dislike
you because you did something that aroused their hate. On this
point, King quoted Jesus: "Why do you see the speck that is in
your brother's eye, but do not notice the log that is in your own
eye?" (Matthew 7:3)
• Look for the good in others. "The person who hates you most
has some good in him; even the nation that hates you most has
some good in it; even the race that hates you most has some
good in it," said King. "See God's image there... and you will
take a new attitude."
• Choose love rather than hate. "[Returning] hate for hate only intensifies the
existence of hate and evil in the universe. If I hit you and you hit me and I hit you
back and go on. ... It just never ends. Somewhere somebody must have a little sense,
and that's the strong person. The strong person is the person who can cut off the
chain of hate, the chain of evil.... And you do that by love."
• Guard your heart. "Hate at any point is a cancer that gnaws away at the very vital
center of your life and your existence. It is like eroding acid that eats away the best
and the objective center of your life. So, Jesus says love, because hate destroys the
hater as well as the hated."
• Persevere. King affirmed, "As I look into your eyes, and into the eyes of all of my
brothers [and sisters] in Alabama and all over America and over the world, I say to
you, 'I love you. I would rather die than hate you? And I'm foolish enough to believe
that through the power of this love somewhere, men [people] of the most recalcitrant
bent will be transformed."12
The love of Jesus flowing through us to our enemies has the power to break the bonds
of hatred and division, transforming not only our enemies, but ourselves as well.
10. Conclusion
Throughout this chapter, we explored what love is and what it looks like to love. W
have seen that God's love is agape, totally selfless, giving, and for our good. We saw than
he most important commandment is to love God and that the second is to love vour
neighbor as yourself (Matthew 22:37-39). This teaching is so important that it also
appears in Mark 12:29-31 and in Luke 10:27.
And the gospel of John uses the word "love"
57 times—more than the other three gospels
combined!? The command to love your neighbor
is also repeated in the epistles (Romans 13:9,
James 2:8). Clearly, Love was central to who Jesus
was and what he came to do. It was also central
to Jesus' earliest followers. Indeed, for Christians,
love is our primary calling and our greatest joy.
Becoming a person who loves like God is the
DONATIOU
work of the Holy Spirit within us, transforming
our desires, reordering our loves, and helping us to
receive God's love for ourselves so that it can flow
freely to others. Cultivating a life of love begins
with looking to Jesus' example. It also means expanding our view of who our neighbor
actually is and practicing habits that teach us how to love well. Love demands not just
words, but action (1 John 3:18, Matthew 25:34-40), in our local communities and our
nation. God's love stretches us even further by challenging us to love our enemies.
Love is the defining mark of a Christian. Francis Schaeffer, an American theologian
and philosopher, wrote:
We as Christians are called upon to love all people as neighbors, loving them as ourselves
[and] to love all true Christians in a way that the world may observe.... Love-and the
unity it attests to—is the mark Christ gave Christians to wear before the world. Only
with this mark may the world know that Christians are indeed Christians and that Jesus
was sent by the Father. 4
It is through God's love that we experience salvation, freedom from sin, and everlasting
joy. It is through God's love that we become the people he calls us to be. And God's love
compels us to share the gospel with others so that they, too, can delight in relationship
with the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. This is what Christianity is all abour.
ENDNOTES
"Loren Cunningham, The Book that Tranforms Nations: The Power of the Bible to Change Any Country
Seattle, WA: YWAM, 2007), 44-45.
'"Love and the Hebrew Language 31oT» Messianic Prophecy Bible Project, https://free.messianicbible.com/
feature/love-and-the-hebrew-languagel.
CHAPTER 17 | 243
© Loving God and Others


<!-- page-8 (book p.245) -->

°C. S. Lewis in a letter to Mrs. Johnson, dated Feb. 19, 1954. The Collected Letters of C. S. Lewis: Books,
Broadcasts, and the War, 1931-1949, vol. III, ed. Walter Hooper (New York: HarperCollins, 2004), 428-29;
also cited in https://www.cslewis.com/lewis-on-love.
*Rick Warren, "We Love Because God Loves Us," Daily Hope with Rick Warren, April 7, 2019, https://www.
oneplace.com/ministries/daily-hope/read/devotionals/daily-hope-wich-rick-warren/we-love-because-god-
loves-us-daily-hope-with-rick-warren-april-7-2019-11807422.html.
"John Stonestreet, cited by Jeff Myers, "What is the"'Good Life?," Summit Ministries, November 5, 2013,
https://www.summit.org/resources/articles/what-is-the-good-lifel.
6"The Good Samaritan at Work-Loving Your Neighbor As Yourself (Luke-10:25-37);" Theology of Work
Project, revised June 30, 2017, https://www.theologyofwork.org/new-testament/luke/gods-provision-luke/
the-good-samaritan-at-work-loving-your-neighbor-as-yourself-luke-1025-37.
*Church and State section under "Lutheranism," Encyclopaedia Britannica, https://www.britannica.com/
topic/Lutheranism/Church-and-state.
*John Stonestreet, cited by Nick Eicher, "Avoiding the Political Illusion," World Magazine, November 14,
2014, https://world.wng.org/2014/11/avoiding_the_political_illusion.
'"'Declaration of Independence: A Transcription," National Archives, https://www.archives.gov/founding-
docs/declaration-transcript.
1°Robert Greenleaf, Servant Leadership: A Journey into the Nature of Legitimate Power and Greatness, ed. Larry
C. Spears, (Mahwah, NJ: Paulist Press, 2002), 43-44.
'What's So Important About Loving Your Enemies?," Jesus Film Project, June 24, 2019, https://www.
jesusfilm.org/blog/important-loving-your-enemies/.
12Martin Luther King, Jr., "Loving Your Enemies," The Martin Luther King Jr. Research and Education
Institute, Stanford University, https://kinginstitute.stanford.edu/king-papers/documents/loving-your-
enemies-sermon-delivered-dexter-avenue-baptist-church.
"Robert L. Deffinbaugh, "47. What Is This Thing Called Love? (John 21:1-25)," in That You Might Believe:
Study on the Gospel of John, Bible.org, August 20, 2009, https://bible.org/seriespage/47-what-thing-called-
love-john-211-25, end note 211.
"Francis A. Schaeffer, The Mark of a Christian (Wheaton, IL: InterVarsity Press, 1970), 59.
Conclusion
Jesu
1. Encountering Scripture
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to list the steps to reading the Bible well and to
summarize the biblical metanarrative.
For the last 17 chapters, we've been exploring the Chrisian worldview - what iris, what it
means for our lives, and how we get involved in it. In this final chapter, well briefly review
what we've learned and then consider how Christianity provides meaningful ansvers to
some of life's biggest questions. We'll conclude with a few thoughts abour how to share the
good news of Christianity with others.
244 | CHAPTER 17
