# Chapter 18

<!-- page-1 (book p.245) -->

°C. S. Lewis in a letter to Mrs. Johnson, dated Feb. 19, 1954. The Collected Letters of C. S. Lewis: Books,
Broadcasts, and the War, 1931-1949, vol. III, ed. Walter Hooper (New York: HarperCollins, 2004), 428-29;
also cited in https://www.cslewis.com/lewis-on-love.
*Rick Warren, "We Love Because God Loves Us," Daily Hope with Rick Warren, April 7, 2019, https://www.
oneplace.com/ministries/daily-hope/read/devotionals/daily-hope-wich-rick-warren/we-love-because-god-
loves-us-daily-hope-with-rick-warren-april-7-2019-11807422.html.
"John Stonestreet, cited by Jeff Myers, "What is the"'Good Life?," Summit Ministries, November 5, 2013,
https://www.summit.org/resources/articles/what-is-the-good-lifel.
6"The Good Samaritan at Work-Loving Your Neighbor As Yourself (Luke-10:25-37);" Theology of Work
Project, revised June 30, 2017, https://www.theologyofwork.org/new-testament/luke/gods-provision-luke/
the-good-samaritan-at-work-loving-your-neighbor-as-yourself-luke-1025-37.
*Church and State section under "Lutheranism," Encyclopaedia Britannica, https://www.britannica.com/
topic/Lutheranism/Church-and-state.
*John Stonestreet, cited by Nick Eicher, "Avoiding the Political Illusion," World Magazine, November 14,
2014, https://world.wng.org/2014/11/avoiding_the_political_illusion.
'"'Declaration of Independence: A Transcription," National Archives, https://www.archives.gov/founding-
docs/declaration-transcript.
1°Robert Greenleaf, Servant Leadership: A Journey into the Nature of Legitimate Power and Greatness, ed. Larry
C. Spears, (Mahwah, NJ: Paulist Press, 2002), 43-44.
'What's So Important About Loving Your Enemies?," Jesus Film Project, June 24, 2019, https://www.
jesusfilm.org/blog/important-loving-your-enemies/.
12Martin Luther King, Jr., "Loving Your Enemies," The Martin Luther King Jr. Research and Education
Institute, Stanford University, https://kinginstitute.stanford.edu/king-papers/documents/loving-your-
enemies-sermon-delivered-dexter-avenue-baptist-church.
"Robert L. Deffinbaugh, "47. What Is This Thing Called Love? (John 21:1-25)," in That You Might Believe:
Study on the Gospel of John, Bible.org, August 20, 2009, https://bible.org/seriespage/47-what-thing-called-
love-john-211-25, end note 211.
"Francis A. Schaeffer, The Mark of a Christian (Wheaton, IL: InterVarsity Press, 1970), 59.
Conclusion
Jesu
1. Encountering Scripture
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to list the steps to reading the Bible well and to
summarize the biblical metanarrative.
For the last 17 chapters, we've been exploring the Chrisian worldview - what iris, what it
means for our lives, and how we get involved in it. In this final chapter, well briefly review
what we've learned and then consider how Christianity provides meaningful ansvers to
some of life's biggest questions. We'll conclude with a few thoughts abour how to share the
good news of Christianity with others.
244 | CHAPTER 17


<!-- page-2 -->

Let's start with review. We've spent a lot of time talking about the Bible, which is
inspired by God, rooted in history, and trustworthy in everything it teaches. In it, God
reveals himself to us so that we can know him
personally and enter into relationship with him.
The Bible tells the true story of God's world, and
in so telling, it reveals our purpose and how we
can participate in God's mission. The Bible is
like a compass; it points us in the right direction
and guides us in wise living!
Throughout history, the Bible has been
carefully copied, preserved, and translated.
Many biblical events, places, and characters
have been verified in historical and archeological
studies, affirming the trustworthiness and
reliability of the Bible. However, the evidence
does not establish the Bible's authority. The
authority of Scripture comes from God himself. It is his message, and if we are to
understand and apply it, we must learn to read Scripture well. This involves (1) choosing
a good translation; (2) paying attention to the content; (3) understanding its historical
context and (4) the literary context; (5) looking for relationships; (6) using Bible helps; and
(7) courageously pursuing a response.
God invites us to encounter him in the grand storyline of the Bible. The Bible reveals
a metanarrative that is comprehensive, coherent, and normative for our lives. The Bible's
story can be told in six acts:
• Act I: Creation-God created a good world where humans could dwell in harmony
with him, themselves, others, and creation. Humans are made in God's image and
given the task of ruling the earth wisely.
• Act 2: The Fall—The first human pair rebelled against God and brought sin into the
world, leading to violence, the breakdown of relationships, and death.
• Act 3: Redemption Initiated—Despite the catastrophe of sin, God refused to give
up on his world. He chose the family of Abraham out of grace, rescued Abraham's
descendants (Israel) from slavery, and called them to be a kingdom of priests so that
through them all people would be blessed.
• Interlude: Second Temple Period-After their failure to be faithful to God and
long years spent in exile, Israel looked for a messiah who would rescue them and
establish God's kingdom.
• Act 4: Redemption Accomplished—Jesus entered the world as the God-incarnate
Messiah. He announced the kingdom of God had arrived. Living a fully human and
sinless life, Jesus died on the cross, then rose again in order to defeat sin and death.
• Act 5: Restoration Initiated—Following Jesus' ascension to heaven, the Holy Spirit
came to empower the church to share the good news and to be agents of restoration
and reconciliation.
246 | CHAPTER 18
FOUNDATIONS G
• Act 6: Restoration Accomplished-When Jesus returns to Earth. he will bring final
judgment on evil and fully establish God's kingdom in the new heavens and new
earth.
In reading this great story, we come to know God; we see what he has done. is doing, and
will do. We find the meaning of our individual stories by joining them with God's story
2. Growing in the Life of Faith
» OBJECTIVE: You will be able to name at least 15 attributes of God.
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to explain how to grow in relationship with God
and how to become more like Christ.
From our survey of the metanarrative of Scripture, we pressed on to discover who God is,
who we are, the goal of the Christian life, and the practices that help us grow to be mor
like Christ. Let's review those topics.
In order to get a true understanding of God, we must look at how God reveals himself
through the metanarrative and individual stories in Scripture. From these we see that God
is self existent, yet he desires to share life with others. He is the Creator, yet he does not
stand aloof from his creation. He is personal. He is Spirit, yet he was incarnate in Jesus.
God is eternal, all-knowing, all-powerful, everywhere present, unchanging, holy, wise,
and righteous. Above all, God is love. God is the most powerful being in the universe, yet
he exercises his power through, agape, self-giving love, which he displayed most clearly
in Jesus.' God's loving nature makes sense in light of the fact that God is a Trinity-one
Being in three Persons: Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.
God also tells us about us, humans. We were created by God out of love, made in his
image, and given responsibility to love, steward, and rule wisely in God's world. However,
each person is broken and corrupted by sin. Through his death and resurrection, Jesus
saved us from the curse of sin. By trusting
in him, we are redeemed from the bondage
of sin, are united to Christ, and await our
future glorification. In the meantime, Jesus
calls us to imitate and follow him. Following
Jesus means becoming a servant, picking up
our cross, being willing to suffer, living in
hope, and glorifying God in all that we do. In
becoming like Christ, we become the people
that God intended for us to be.
However, this transformation doesn't
happen automatically or all at once. We get
to cooperate with the Spirit so we can be
remade. One of the ways we do this is through practicing spiritual disciplines: solitude,
self-examination, prayer, worship, meditating on Scripture, fasting, giving, stewardship,
and more. We don't practice these disciplines to earn God's favor but rather to cooperate
CHAPTER 18 | 247
G Conclusion


<!-- page-3 -->

with the work God wants to do in us. Furthermore, we can't become like Christ all
by ourselves. We are always called to follow Jesus in community with other believers.
Our individual spiritual practices shape and enable us for life in community. Together,
believers worship and exercise their spiritual gifts in order to challenge, encourage, and
build one another up. Christian community provides a place for
confession and repentance, for celebrating God's work in baptism
and communion, for studying Scripture, and for serving one
another through love.
Together, we learn to follow Jesus' greatest commandments:
love God and love your neighbor (Matthew 22:36-40). The kind
of love Jesus calls us to is agape—a totally selfless, self-giving
love. To love God in this way is to reject all forms of idolatry
that lead us astray. It is to be in loving relationship with him,
worshipping him as Lord. As we receive God's generous love
for ourselves, we come to love him, and this leads us to love our
neighbors—our friends, family, and even our enemies. Ultimately,
this love becomes a witness for the gospel, which has the power to
transform society.
Growing in the life of faith is a lifelong process of listening,
trusting, and obeying the Holy Spirit's voice in our hearts and in
Scripture. Following Jesus together with others in our community,
we become like him.
3. Putting It All Together Part 1
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to articulate how Christianity answers five of life's
biggest questions.
At the beginning of this book, we talked about how every worldview claims to offer
guidance for life and provide meaningful answers to life's biggest questions. We believe
that Christianity provides answers that best fit with the way the world actually is and helps
us live in it with meaning and purpose. Let's look briefly at the answers Christianity can
give to ten different questions.
Where did I come from? One of the most popular ideas about origins is that humans
are the product of a long process of random chance and natural selection, so we are,
essentially, an accident. Christianity offers a different answer. It teaches that we are the
creation of the Trinitarian God, who is defined by love and
who longs to share that love with us. We are not meaningless
accidents of nature. We are the product of God's creative love?
Who am I?
Who am I? In the search for identity, many people come to
define themselves by what they own, what they can accomplish,
or what others say about them.? Yet all of these things fail to
provide a satisfactory basis for identity. It seems we can never
own enough, do enough, or make everyone like us. The Christian
story, however, begins by grounding our identity in God. We are God's image-bearers
endowed with dignity and value from our first moment. Nothing can ever change that.
We are deeply loved by God and invited to claim our identity as his beloved sons and
daughters.
Where am. Flow we Vlap the world influences the way we live in it. Is this world a
meaningless product of chable all place we are ultimately free to exploit? Or is the world a
material prison, & bad place that will be discarded and from which we will one day escape
The Christian worldview says no to both these views. It says that the world is purposeful
and valuable because it is God's good creation. Sadly, God's world has been corrupted by
sin. One day, however, God will restore all things, allowing creation to fourish again. In
the meantime, we have a responsibility to wisely steward the world and its resources.
Is there a God, and if so, what is God like? Some believe that God is an impersonal
force; others, that he is a personal Being who is evil or tyrannical; and still others, that he
is like a benevolent great granddad in the sky. Some believe that creation and God are the
same thing, while others deny the existence of God. The Bible affirms that God's existence
is fundamental. He is the uncreated Creator, and he holds the universe together. The Bible
also affirms that God is persona, showing self giving love, goodness, and justice. Though
sin separated us from God, he is not distant. He desires to be
known and to share his love with us. He reveals himself to us
through the Scriptures that point to Christ as our Savior.
Is there any such thing as truth? In the modern West, the
idea of truth has largely been abandoned. For many, truth
is simply whatever you make it: "You have your truth, I have
mine, and both of us are equally right." However, in such a
world, there can be no right or wrong, good or evil-anything
goes. Christianity makes a bold claim to teaching the truth about
God, ourselves, and the world. In addition to encouraging us to use
reason, evidence, and argument in pursuit of truth, it invites us to get to know
a person-Jesus, who is himself the way, the truth, and the lite.
4. Putting It All Together Part 2
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to describe how Christianity answers five more of
life's biggest questions.
Whom can I trust? As we have seen, everyone submits to some kind of authority.
Without trust, we wouldn't be able to get far in the world. Yet those we trust may let us
down, leaving us with feelings of anger and abandonment. Christianity invites us to pur
our trust in Jesus, the one who never fails. To be sure, God doesn't always do what we
want him to, nor does trusting Jesus mean that we will escape suffering. Yet Scripture
shows us that God has been faithful in the past, even giving his own life for us, which
gives us confidence that we can trust him with the future.
CHAPTER 18 | 249
248 | CHAPTER 18
5 Conclusion


<!-- page-4 -->

Why am I here? We all want our lives to count for something,
to make a difference in the world; but sometimes, even our best
efforts fail. It's tempting to throw up our hands, conclude that
Why?
everything is meaningless, and bury ourselves in entertainment.
But Christianity says that we are here because God loves us and
wants us to know him, and that our lives have meaning in his
great story. As his image-bearers and beloved children, we find
purpose as we participate with him in the work of bringing light
into darkness until the ultimate restoration.
How should I live? Many people believe that life is all about the pursuit of personal
pleasure—that money, fame, power, sex, or something else will bring them happiness.
They think the best way to live is to get all you can while you can. Christianity calls us to
something totally different. God isn't against pleasure; however, we are not simply free to
do as we please, regardless of the consequences. We are called to take our cue from Jesus
and participate in God's mission through acts of self-giving love. In following Jesus, we
find true joy and satisfaction in life.
How can I know right from wrong? Modern Western culture tells us that there is no
such thing as right and wrong, that humans are free from any standard of morality; but
time and again, when right and wrong are supposedly erased, right is defined by whoever
has the most power. In contrast, for Christians, God is the standard of morality. We are
called to imitate God's good character in our lives and decision-making. What is right and
wrong is not always crystal clear. But wisdom, discernment, prayer, and careful reflection
on Scripture, can lead us to Christlike and just actions.
What happens after I die? Some people think that this life is all there is. Others imagine
multiple opportunities at life, conceive of an afterlife where they merge with the universe,
or dream of paradise. The Christian worldview teaches that this life is not the end. One
day, those who have trusted Christ will rise to be
with him in the new creation, where they will be
given new bodies, freedom from evil, and the ability
to live freely as the people God created them to be.
Those who reject Christ will spend eternity away
from God's presence. Christians have hope that
death is not final, because in his resurrection, Jesus
proved himself to be stronger than death.
Here we only briefly sketch the answers that
Christianity provides to ten questions, but each
answer could be expanded. In addition, there are
many more questions to be asked, for example: Why
is there pain and suffering? Are there many paths to
God? How should we interact with nature? For now, hopefully you are beginning to see
how Christianity can provide meaningful and satisfying answers to our biggest questions.
5. Sharing the Good News
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to deduce that evangelism and apologetics are
part of living out the Christian faith.
Christians have all been commissioned to share the good news of forgiveness from sins
to spread the gospel, teach, disciple, and baptize people in the name of the Father, Son,
and new life in Christ. At the end of the Gospel of Matthew, Jesus instructed the disciples
and Holy Spirit. This is the work of evangelism.
Evangelism is about inviting people to hear the good news of Jesus, put their trust
in him, and receive forgiveness and new life. Evangelism is best done in personal
conversations. You can start by sharing your own story about what God has done for you,
and then inviting others to meet Jesus for themselves and experience the pover of his
transforming love. Essential to evangelism is verbally sharing the gospel — that Jesus "died
for our sins in accordance with the Scriptures, that
he was buried, that he was raised on the third day"
(1 Corinthians 15:3-4); that Jesus has defeated sin
and death; and that Jesus is King over all creation.
Ultimately, evangelism is inviting people to become
participants in God's story.
We also evangelize by living out the implications
of the gospel. James warned believers that faith
without works is dead (James 2:14-26). That does
not mean we work to earn our salvation. It means
we are saved by grace to then do good works
(Ephesians 2:8-10). What James is saying, and
what Paul teaches in Ephesians, is that true faith
in Jesus will transform the way we live. If we do
not follow Jesus in our actions, the world will see
that our faith is dead and meaningless. That's why, as Christians, we need to regularly
ask ourselves: Do our actions align with the teaching of Jesus? Do we love like he does.
Do we value and treat people as God's image-bearers? Do we practice forgiveness, mercy,
and compassion, even for our enemies? Are we a people defined by justice, healing, and
hope? These types of behavior are the signposts pointing to the reality that in Jesus, God's
kingdom has truly come into the world.
Some people will be ready and willing to receive the gospel message when they hear
it, but others will have doubts or other barriers to belief. This is where apologetics comes
in. Apologetics is the art of defending, commending, and translating the Christian faith."
It is about demonstrating the wonder and beauty of Chriscianity to those who have not
yet experienced it. Think of apologetics as clearing the way for evangelism. Apologetics
helps address questions and objections that people have to Chriscianity that keep them
from accepting the gospel message and following Jesus." Apologists often address questions
like: How could a good God allow suffering? Can science and Christianity coexist? What
CHAPTER 18 | 251
250 CHAPTER 18
FOUNDATIONS 5
S Conclusion


<!-- page-5 -->

evidence is there that Jesus actually rose from the dead? Are miracles possible? Does God
send people to hell? and so on. Good apologetics helps people see how Christianity is
reasonable, relevant, and desirable.
In the next volume of this series, we'll spend a lot more time discussing evangelism
and apologetics. Along the way, we'll grow deeper in our understanding of the Christian
worldview by seeing how it stands up to criticism. We hope that this volume
Foundations— has deepened your understanding of the Christian faith and encouraged
you on your journey with Jesus. But this is only the beginning. There is so much more to
explore!
ENDNOTES
'For more discussion on how to read the Bible see Dan Kimball, How (Not) to Read the Bible (Grand Rapids:
MIl: Zondervan, 2020) or see Gordon D. Fee and Douglas Stuart, How to Read the Bible for All Its Worth
(Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan Academic, 2014).
'Henry Nouwen, "Being the Beloved (Full)," YouTube, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v8U4V4aaNWk.
'Alister E. McGrath, Mere Apologetics: How to Help Seekers & Skeptics Find Faith (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker,
2012), 17.
*McGrath, Mere Apologetics, 17-23.
"Paul M. Gould, Cultural Apologetics: Renewing the Christian Voice, Conscience, and Imagination in a
Disenchanted World (Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2019), 24-25.
Appendices
Apostles Creed
Wel believe in God,
the Father almighty,
creator of heaven and earth.
[We] believe in Jesus Christ,
God's only Son, our Lord,
who was conceived by the Holy Spirit,
born of the Virgin Mary,
suffered under Pontius Pilate,
was crucified, died, and was buried;
he descended to the dead.
On the third day he rose again;
he ascended into heaven,
he is seated at the right hand of the Father,
and he will come again to judge the living and the dead.
[We] believe in the Holy Spirit,
the holy catholic [universal] church,
the communion of saints,
the forgiveness of sins,
the resurrection of the body,
and the life everlasting. AMEN.
APOSTLES CREED | 253
252 CHAPTER 18
S Appendices


<!-- page-6 -->

Recommended Reading
CHRISTIANITY
C. S. Lewis, Mere Christianity (New York, NY:
HarperCollins, 1952). Helpful for both Christians
and skeptics alike, this now-classic explanation
and defense of basic Christian beliefs also makes
a bold case for the relevance of Christianity in
contemporary society.
N. T. Wright, Simply Christian: Why Christianity
Makes Sense (New York, NY: HarperCollins,
2006). In the tradition of Mere Christianity, New
Testament scholar, N. T. Wright, shows how
Christianity makes sense of our world by walking
readers through key Christian topics-God, Israel,
Jesus, the Spirit, worship, prayer, the Bible and
many more.
Michael Reeves, Delighting in the Trinity: An
Introduction to the Christian Faith (Downers
Grove, IL: Inter Varsity Press, 2012). A surprisingly
accessible and lively introduction to Christianity
through the lens of the Trinity. With obvious joy
and delight, Reeves shows how the Trinity is at the
heart of the Christian faith.
W. Gary Phillips, William E. Brown, and John
Stonestreet, Making Sense of Your World: A Biblical
Worldview (Salem, WI: Sheffield Publishing
Company, 2008). Written from a distinctly
worldviewish perspective, this book explores the
fundamentals of the Christian worldview and shows
how it offers a compelling vision for all of life.
Alister E. McGrath, Christianity: An Introduction
(Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing, 2015). A
textbook introduction to Christianity, which,
in addition to covering topics like Jesus and the
Bible, also looks at Christian creeds, history, and
denominations.
SCRIPTURE
Gordon D. Fee and Douglas Stuart, How to Read
the Bible for All Its Worth (Grand Rapids, MI:
Zondervan, 2014). A classic introduction to
reading the Bible, this book provides helpful
guidance for reading every major genre of biblical
literature-from poetry and narrative, to prophecy
and parable.
Michael W. Goheen and Craig G. Bartholomew, The
True Story of the Whole World: Finding Your Place
in the Biblical Drama (Grand Rapids, MI: Brazos
Press, 2020). One of the best and most accessible
explorations of the biblical metanarrative. The
previous edition of Goheen and Bartholomew's
book provided the outline and template for the six
acts of the biblical story described in chapters 6-12
of this textbook.
Eugene H. Peterson, Eat This Book: A Conversation
in the Art of Spiritual Reading (Grand Rapids,
MI: Eerdmans, 2006). Using an ancient method
of reading Scripture, Lectio Divina, Peterson
demonstrates how Scripture is not just to be read,
but lived. He also explains how seeing Scripture as
a story changes everything.
Lesslie Newbigin, A Walk Through the Bible
(Louisville, KY: Westminster John Knox Press,
1999). A short, fly-by overview of the biblical story,
which includes Newbigin's dynamite conclusion
about the uniqueness of the Christian story.
JESUS AND THE GOSPEL
Jeannine K. Brown, The Gospels as Stories: A Narrative
DISCIPLESHIP AND SPIRITUAL
Approach to Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John
FORMATION
(Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2020).
An introduction to reading and interpreting
Jamin Goggin and Kyle Strobel, Beloved Dust:
the gospels using the lens of narrative criticism.
Drawing Close to God by Discovering the Truth
Jeannine Brown helps readers see the individual
About Yourself (Nashville, TN: Nelson Books,
episodes in each gospel as part of the larger story.
2014). Pastor Jamin Goggin and scholar Kyle
Strobel explain why self-help strategies for the
Scot McKnight, The King Jesus Gospel: The Original
spiritual life always fail. They encourage readers to
Good News Revisited (Grand Rapids, MI:
see themselves as beloved dust" and in so doing
Zondervan, 2011). In this important book, Scot
open themselves up to God's transforming work.
McKnight argues that the gospel is more than
Richard J. Foster, Celebration of Discipline: The Path
just the plan of salvation. It is about Jesus as the
to Spiritual Growth (New York, NY: HarperCollins,
completion of the story of Israel.
1998). One of the 20th century's landmark texts
on the practice of spiritual disciplines and spiritual
Richard Bauckham, Jesus: A Very Short Introduction
growth, including discussion of both private and
(Oxford, England: Oxford University Press,
corporate disciplines.
2011). A small little book written from a scholarly
Dietrich Bonhoeffer, Life Together (New York, NY:
perspective, which introduces Jesus in his historical
HarperCollins, 1954). Drawn from Bonhoeffer's
context and explores his identity and public
personal experience of living in community in
ministry.
an underground seminary during World War II,
this short work demonstrates the need for, and
John Stott, The Cross of Christ (Downer's Grove,
IL: InterVarsity Press, 2021). John Stott's classic
possibility of, true Christian fellowship.
masterpiece is the definitive evangelical book on
C. S. Lewis, The Four Loves (New York, NY:
the cross. Stott surveys theories of atonement,
HarperCollins, 1960). Lewis classic exposition of
examining the meaning and relevance of Jesus'
death.
the four Greek words for love: storge (affection),
philia (friendship), eros (romantic love), and agape
(self-giving love).
Frederick Buechner, Telling the Truth: The Gospel as
Tragedy, Comedy, and Fairy Tale (New York, NY:
HarperCollins, 1977). Written for preachers but
applicable to all, Telling the Truth approaches the
gospel from a literary and artistic perspective using
examples from King Lear, The Wizard of Oz, and
other classic tales to illuminate the truth of the
gospel.
RECOMMENDED READING | 255
254 | RECOMMENDED READING
FOUNDATIONS G
5 Appendices
