# Chapter 6

<!-- page-1 -->

1. BHAGAVAD GITA
Arjuna's heart pounded with anxiety as the chariot clattered
onto the battlefield of Kuru. The horses snorted and tried to
bolt, held back only by the expert guidance of Arjuna's chariot
driver, Krishna.
"Stop here," commanded Arjuna uncertainly. There, in the
middle of the battlefield, he could see what was about to unfold.
On one side, the Pandavas, Arjuna's kin and followers, prepared
their weapons for slaughter. On the other side, the troops of the
Kaurava clan moved into formation. The Kauravas were his
cousins, but today they were the enemy. As soon as the battle
began, Arjuna knew he would destroy them without mercy. Or
would he?
CHAPTER


<!-- page-2 -->

His heart pounding, his breath coming in gasps, a thousand thoughts filled Arjuna's head.
He felt pity for those he would kill and dread that the battle might turn and his life might end
today. I cannot fight, he thought. I have no will.
Arjuna watched as Krishna spoke reassuringly to the nervous steeds shivering in the rising
light. At last he spoke. "I am weighed down by pity, Krishna; my mind is utterly confused, he
confessed. "Tell me where my duty lies, which path I should take"
Krishna sighed and turned his gaze away from the enemy formations directly toward Arjuna's
eyes. "Wise men do not grieve for the dead or for the living," he said simply.
"What... are you... saying?" asked Arjuna, startled.
Krishna replied matter-of-factly, "These bodies come to an end; but that vast embodied Self
is ageless, fathomless, eternal."
Arjuna stared at Krishna, and suddenly he knew. This was no chariot driver; he was peering
into the eyes of a god who had come down to steady Arjuna's nerves for what he must do. All
the secrets of the universe were in the mind of this God-man holding the reins. It was a battle
for a kingdom. It was also a battle for the warrior's tormented mind.
Tentatively, Arjuna broke away from Krishna's gaze and surveyed the enemy lines. "The
mind is restless, unsteady, turbulent, wild, stubborn, he said slowly, choosing words as carefully
as he knew how. "Truly, it seems to me as hard to master as the wind"
Krishna did not reply for a long time. "You are right, Arjuna" he said at last. "The mind is
restless and hard to master, but by constant practice and detachment it can be mastered in the end."
2. NEW SPIRITUALITY: THE MODERN SEARCH FOR MYSTERY
Arjuna and Krishna's conversation comprises an epic poem: the Bhagavad Gita, "The
Song of the Blessed One,, written perhaps more than two thousand years ago and to this day
a treasured stanza of the Mahabharata, India's national epic poem. Like many famous poems,
the Bhagavad Gita is more than metered verse. It is a code, a set of carefully chosen words
placed thoughtfully on the page so as to jar loose the reader's imagination and communicate
what those who believe in it consider to be a deep, persuasive reality.
For thousands of years Hindus have studied the narrative of Arjuna and Krishna as a
source of truth not only about the unseen universe but also about the duty of man. It is a vision
of what actually exists, an eternal, nonpersonal, encompassing all, the Self, standing in stark
contrast to the individualistic, autonomous self at the heart of the secular vision of the world.?
But the message of the Bhagavad Gita is not just a Hindu vision. Today its description of
reality weaves loosely a pattern of ideas, beliefs, values, and convictions held by millions of
Americans, most of whom have no historical connection to the long-held religious traditions
undergirding their own playfully held creeds.
Whether frivolously or seriously, almost everyone searches for meaning. Unfortunately,
the answers religion and science ofter often seem unsatisfactorv. In this chapter we will explor
an ancient worldview masquerading as a new path for meaning on which the human race car
travel to achieve true enlightenment. We call this worldview New Spirituality.
On the one hand, New Spirituality is hard to define because it lacks a definitive core of
belief. Christians believe in the death and resurrection of jesus? Secularists trust the scientific
method. Marxists think feeding resentment about capitalism will lead to the truth. Muslims
consider the creed of Islam worth living and dying for.
Postmodernists, who pride themselves on rejecting all
other metanarratives, seem to think suspicion is a suffi-
ciently large frame in which to hang other beliefs.
So what do New Spiritualists believe is a sufficient
source of hope that both explains the world and forms
the basis of the good life?
New Spirituality:
a pantheistic worldview
that teaches everything
and everyone are
connected through divine
3. EVERYTHING IS SPIRITUAL
Deepak Chopra, a self-proclaimed spiritual teacher, thinks the problems we face in our
world are primarily spiritual. On this point Christians would agree. Second Corinthians
10:4 says, "The weapons of our warfare are not of the flesh but have divine power to destroy
strongholds" In fact, Christians might even find Chopras framing of our spiritual problems
All around us people ache with emptiness and yearning; there's a vacuum to be filled,
and it's a spiritual vacuum. What other word really fits? Only when people are given
hope that this ache can be healed will we truly know what the future holds. Let sci-
ence join in the cure, because otherwise, we may wind up with marvels of technology
serving empty hearts and abandoned souls.4
What is the healing hope of which Chopra speaks? For a growing number of spiritual
teachers, business consultants, bestselling authors, and television hosts, hope springs from
rejecting traditional religion and embracing our divinity, power, and godlikeness. Only this
will give us meaning. Only this will enable us to change the
world. As Rhonda Byrne claimed in her mega-bestseller
The Secret, "The Secret means that we are creators of our
Universe, and that every wish that we want to create will
manifest in our lives."
What we call New Spirituality is often referred to as the
New Age movement, transcendentalism, neo-paganism,
new consciousness, or just "spirituality" Previous editions of
Understanding the Times used the term Cosmic Humanism.
Ken Wilber, a prolific author in the field, uses the term "the
For a growing number
of spiritual teachers,
business consultants,
bestselling authors, and
television hosts, hope
springs from rejecting
traditional religion and
embracing our divinity,
power, and godlikeness.
Integral vision" to describe his efforts to create a "composite
map" of understanding based on insights from all of the
vorlds cultures and traditions. As this particular worldview has changed in the last twenty
years, though, we think the term New Spirituality best explains the way its answers to lifes
ultimate questions have captured the imaginations of tens of millions of Americans.
New Spirituality is based on a radically different vision of the world, of the nature and
haracter of God, and of the purpose of human beings in this world and the next from the
vision of traditional religions. Yet it often confuses Christians because of frequent positive
references to God and Jesus Christ.? The growth of New Spirituality in the last several de-
cades has resulted in many people being taken captive by its ideas. As thinking Christians,


<!-- page-3 -->

we must understand where it comes from, what answers it proposes to the mysteries of life,
and how it frames a view of the world unique from the other worldviews considered in this
book. Proverbs 15:28 says, "The heart of the righteous ponders how to answer." So let's get
started doing just that.
4. WHERE DOES NEW SPIRITUALITY COME FROM, AND WHY SHOULD WE
Fans of the science-fiction film The Matrix will recall a memorable scene of Neo watching
a boy in Buddhist robes sitting cross-legged on the floor, bending metal spoons simply by
staring at them. The boy explains to Neo, "Don't try to bend the spoon. That's impossible.
Instead, only try to realize the truth.... There is no spoon."
The boy's statement reflects a view of reality utterly at odds with Western thought: the
physical world we perceive is an illusion where nothing is objective except our own mental
states. "Larry" and Andy Wachowski wanted to play on this view of the world while writing
and directing The Matrix: "One of the things that we had talked about when we first had the
idea of The Matrix was an idea that [we] believe philosophy and religion and mathematics
all try to answer ... a reconciling between a natural world and another world that is perceived
by our intellect."
These thoughts are not new, of course. Among the forefathers of contemporary New
Spirituality are poets and writers from the 1800s, such as Ralph Waldo Emerson and Henry
David Thoreau. These men rejected the God of the Bible and instead wrote at length about
a transcendent quality of spirituality experienced purely through personal introspection.
This idea, known as transcendentalism, saw human beings and nature as inherently good
but corrupted by society. Institutions, such as organized religion and politics, for example,
participated in this corruption (this idea will be explored
Transcendentalism: a
religious and philosophical
movement that arose in the
early 1800s as a reaction
against rationalism
and organized religion,
it teaches that human
beings are inherently
good and that nature is
fundamentally divine.
more fully in the "Sociology" chapter of this volume).
Transcendentalism gained more traction through the
writings of Emily Dickinson and Walt Whitman, as well
as the self-help teachings of Mary Baker Eddy, Wallace
Wattles, and Napoleon Hill. In the 1960s, this "new
thought" morphed into a syncretistic worldview, a merg-
ing of Eastern religion with pop psychology, self-help
teaching, meditation, and health-and-wealth doctrines
designed to answer life's most pressing questions.
One of the early chroniclers of New Spiritualit's
development was Marilyn Ferguson, author of a 19805
volume called The Aquarian Conspiracy. Ferguson de-
tailed the unexpected confluence of Eastern spiritual influences and fringe science that
launched the careers of a thousand spiritual teachers. including Deepak Chopra The book
is said to have deeply inspired politician and futurist Al Gore? Translated into sixteen
languages and spawning dozens of copvcat books. The Aquarian Conspiracy was clearly
onto something.
New Spirituality exploded in the 1990s and found wide dissemination through movies,
copies in more than thirty-two countries, achieving distinction as the bestselling American
television, and book sales. The Celestine Prophecy, published in 1993, sold over eight million
hardcover book for two consecutive years. Author James Redfield wrote in the 1997 afterword,
"We are manifesting nothing less than a new world view that will flourish in the next millen-
nium." Another "modern-day spiritual messenger" was Neale Donald Walsch, the author of
fifteen books on spirituality and everyday life. His first five books in the Conversations with
God series all made the New York Times bestseller list, with the first book remaining on the
list for more than two years. His books have been translated into twenty-seven languages,
selling more than seven million copies worldwide.
But the popularity of New Spirituality had not yet reached its apex. Rhonda Byrne's The
Secret became an international sensation after its release in 2006, selling nineteen million
copies and being translated into forty-six languages. The Secret offered its worldview to a
popular audience on the scale of The Purpose Driven Life by Christian pastor and author
Rick Warren. 1°
New Spirituality feeds off popular dissatisfaction with organized religion. Deepak Chopra,
whose books and television appearances have made him a household name to hundreds of
millions of people around the world, claims that science has advanced to the point where
religion has been revealed as nothing more than primitive superstition. Religion cannot
resolve this dilemma [of the human condition]; it has had its chances already. But spiritual-
ity can," he claims. "We need to go back to the source of religion. That source isn't God. It's
consciousness"11
However, even a worldview that shuns identifiable religious traditions might itself be
religious. Remember, a religion is a set of beliefs about the cause, nature, and purpose of the
universe. Advocates of New Spirituality, therefore, are—without question—religious.
Weary of religious conflict and dogmatism, more and more people find a spirituality
stripped of religious dogma attractive. And spirituality sounds freeing and accepting; reli-
sion, on the other hand, seems judgmental and boring. It's common to hear, ""'m spiritual
but not religious." To those raised in religious households, this sounds like a distinction
without a difference. However, to Robert C. Fuller, professor of religious studies at Brad-
ley University, the difference is very real. Most people
losely define spirituality as "a private realm of thought
and expression,, says Fuller, whereas religion focuses on
the "public realm" of institutions, rituals, and doctrines.
Around 20 percent of Americans claim the "spiritual,
but not religious" designation and show "higher levels
of interest in mysticism" while holding "negative feel-
ings toward both clergy and churches."
Spirituality enables people to be interested in what
lies bevond without having to grasp finely textured
doctrines or apologize for the historical abuses people
associated with their tradition have carried out. Even
Spirituality enables people
to be interested in what
lies beyond without
having to grasp finely
textured doctrines or
apologize for the historical
abuses people associated
with their tradition have
carried out. Even among
would-be Secularists,
spirituality is cool.
among would-be Secularists, spirituality is cool. When


<!-- page-4 -->

spirituality is considered an active search for meaning and purpose in lite or as an inter-
est in self-awareness and enlightenment, even 81 percent of college professors considered
themselves spiritual, according to a study by UCLA.! Is this growing interest a scattershot
phenomenon, with each adherent developing his or her own beliefs? Or is New Spirituality
a truly identifable and widespread worldview? Let's see if we can answer these questions by
taking a look at New Spirituality's teachings.
5. WHAT DOES NEW SPIRITUALITY TEACH?
No worldview exists in which adherents agree on everything. However, their shared
agreement on fundamental issues provides ways we can predict what advocates would believe
and teach in such disciplines as theology, philosophy, and ethics. While there are minor
differences in the teachings of New Spirituality advocates such as Deepak Chopra, Eckhart
Tolle, Rhonda Byrne, the Dalai Lama, and others, they seem to adhere to four basic beliefs.
1. Everything is consciousness. Eckhart Tolle is one of the world's most popular
spiritual teachers. His books have sold tens of millions of copies. In a 2011 list of the
top one hundred spiritual teachers in the world, Tolle was listed as number one. 14 "The
whole is made up of existence and Being, the manifested and the unmanifested, the
whole and God," says Tolle. "So when you become aligned with the whole, you become
a conscious part of the interconnectedness of the whole and its purpose: the emergence
of consciousness into this world."15
Those accustomed to thinking of the world as being populated with objects and people,
and people as identifiable individuals who think in personal pronouns of "I" or "me" have
a dificult time understanding where New Spirituality advocates are coming from.
For many, the introduction to the idea of consciousness, energy, Being, and related
concepts was not through self-help books but through George Lucas's now classic film series
Star Wars. "With Star Wars, I consciously set about to
For many, the
introduction to the idea
of consciousness, energy,
Being, and related concepts
was not through self-help
books but through George
Lucas's now classic film
series Star Wars.
re-create myths and the classic mythological motifs,"
said Lucas. "I wanted to use those motifs to deal with
issues that exist today... I see Star Wars as taking all
the issues that religion represents and trying to distill
them down into a more modern and easily accessible
construct... 'm telling an old myth in a new way? 16
When Lucas's characters "feel the force, they're not
sensing the power of the Holy Spirit. In describing the
force to Luke Skywalker, Obi-Wan Kenobi said, "Wel,
the Force is what gives a Jedi his power. It's an energy field
Created by all living things. It surrounds us and penetrates us. It binds the galaxy together"
This could also serve as a good description of the idea of consciousness Tolle and others
embrace, and it seems Lucas was mindful of this connection and interested in promoting it.
Tve always tried to be aware of what I say in my films, because all of us who make motion
pictures are teachers" Lucas says, "teachers with very loud voices"
Consciousness is usually defined in vague terms. Deepak Chopra, however. lists the fol-
lowing qualities of "pure consciousness": silent and peaceful, self-sufficient, awake, possessing
infinite potential, self-organizing, spontaneous, dynamic, blissful, knowing, and whole! How
Chopra knows this is unclear; it leads to as many questions as it answers.
For example, many of the qualities Chopra lists are personal the sorts of attributes a
person, rather than a mindless force, would possess. If consciousness is personal, it would
actually describe a sort of God. In the end, though, Chopra and others see consciousness as
an impersonal force. What makes an impersonal force personal? According to New Spirituality
advocates, the answer is you and me. To New Spiritualists, "God" is personal only in that our
God experiences are subjective and personal.
The Bible teaches something entirely different about God's nature and character. In
Exodus 3:14, God said to Moses, "I Am who I Am." In other words, "I am complete in and
of myself. It's a clear statement of self-determination. The apostle Paul further affirmed
God's self-existence in his speech to a religious society in Athens: "The God who made
the world and everything in it, being Lord of heaven and earth, does not live in temples
made by man, nor is he served by human hands, as though he needed anything, since
he himself gives to all mankind life and breath and everything" (Acts 17:24-25). God is,
as Christian philosopher Francis Schaeffer phrased it, "infinite-personal." This teaching
has no part in New Spiritualist thinking." If everything is collective consciousness, then
ultimately everything is God. This brings us to the second core of New Spiritualist belief.
2. Every person is God. According to New Spiritu-
alists, all is consciousness. Human beings, like all things,
are part of this consciousness. We are not individuals in
the normal Western sense of the term.
Consciousness: the belief
in a divine interconnected
essence of reality.
This aspect of New Spirituality has a long tradition
among a particular group of Buddhists called Middle
Way Consequentialists. Middle Way Consequentialists, who include the revered Tibetan
Buddhist Dalai Lama, reject the existence of objective reality. What about a chair, for example,
actually constitutes "chairness"? If we look at its individual parts, no chair is there. The chair
isnt in the wood or in the varnish or even in the shape. The quality of chairness is a mental
construction. This particular school of Buddhism applies this way of thinking to human
beings. The Dalai Lama says, "Just as there is no chair to be found among its parts and no
rose to be found among its petals, so there is no person to be found among its constituent
aspects of body and mind."2 He continues,
Each of the physical and mental parts of which I am composed is similarly empty
of any identifiable existence... Our initial reaction to recognizing that things do not
possess objective or inherent existence is understandably one of surprise. We are
discovering that the actual way things exist is so very contrary to how we naturaly
relate to them.?
This way of thinking only makes sense if we view consciousness as what is actually real,
and objects and people as separate and distinct things only because we are unable to view
them in their "energy" state.
As you can imagine, scientists who make their living identifying, classifying, and measur-
ing objects in the physical world disagree. Deepak Chopra, however, warns, "It is shortsighted


<!-- page-5 (book p.131) -->

to believe that because science today cannot explain consciousness, consciousness must lie
beyond science's reach. But even if the origin of consciousness is too complex to be fully
grasped by the human mind, that is not evidence that consciousness resides in a supernatural
realm. In fact, though the question of how consciousness arises remains a puzzle, we have
plenty of evidence that consciousness functions according to physical law.""'To Chopra, even
God is not necessary: "All we need is a universe that contains consciousness as an inseparable
aspect of itself."23
But if everything is consciousness, and we call this consciousness "God," then God is
not a separate person with identifiable attributes, as Christianity claims. The New Spiritualist
"God" is actually a "god" —a force, a principle, a vibration, light and sound—not a thinking,
willing, feeling being. God is consciousness, New Spiritualists say, and the better we under-
stand consciousness, the clearer our godlikeness will be to us. "Each of us has access to a
supra-conscious, creative, integrative, self-organizing, intuitive mind whose capabilities are
apparently unlimited, said John Bradshaw. "This is the part of our consciousness that con-
stitutes our God-likeness"* One New Spiritualist, Ruth Montgomery, supposedly channeled
a spirit that spoke through her, claiming, "We are as much God as God is a part of us.... If
each of us is God, then ... together we are God.... This all-for-one-and-one-for-all... makes
us the whole of ... God. New Spirituality theologian John White states that "sooner or later
every human being will feel a call from the cosmos to ascend to godhood."26
I am god. You are god. Every person is god. This
I am god. You are god
Every person is god.
This is what New
Spirituality claims.
is what New Spirituality claims. Meher Baba declared,
"There is only one question. And once you know the an-
swer to that question there are no more to ask.... Who am
I? [A]nd to that Question there is only one Answer-Lam
God!" Shirley MacLaine, a movie actress and spiritual
teacher, recommends beginning each day by affirming
one's own godhood. "You can use I am God or I am that I am as Christ often did, or you can
extend the affirmation to fit your own needs"28
Today, theologians and philosophers use the word pantheism to describe this belief. Pan
means "all" and theos means "God." Pantheists believe "all is God." It's an accurate description
of the theology of New Spirituality, as we will see in the
Pantheism: the belief that
everything in the universe
is ultimately divine.
"Theology" chapter of this volume.
3. Consciousness can be harnessed to achieve
perfection. Eckhart Tolle's book A New Earth soared
to prominence as one of Oprah Winfrey's book club
recommendations. Hundreds of thousands of people
bought it and recommended it to others. According to Tolle, the biblical prophecy of a new
heaven and a new earth will be fulflled as more people harness the power of consciousness.
"The new earth arises as more and more people discover that their main purpose in life is to
bring the light of consciousness into this world and so use whatever they do as a vehicle for
consciousness,, he says.?
One popular way of describing the power of consciousness is the "law of attraction."
Remember that for New sping tuality advocates, everything is energy. hings are energy
Thoughts are energy. Good thoughts produce good energy and bad thoughts inhibit it. As
Rhonda Byrne says in The Secret, "Your thoughts become the things in your life," and "Your
transmission creates your life and it creates the world"2
New Spirituality advocates often point to Jesus as an example of how to tap into the
energy field called consciousness. As John White asserted, "The Son of God... is not Jesus
but our combined Christ consciousness"" Jesus is looked on as one of a select company,
having achieved Christ consciousness. Every person is encouraged to acquire this same level
of consciousness.
New Spirituality sees Christ's life as important because it showed humanity how to achieve
perfection, even godhood. John White states, "The significance of incarnation and resurrection
is not that Jesus was a human like us but rather that we are gods like him—or at least have the
potential to be."** If Jesus is just an example, not a savior, then the Bible's description of his life,
death, and resurrection, and indeed his entire purpose as savior, is either wrong or irrelevant.
4. The purpose of life is overcoming "self." Although Secularism and New Spirituality
both use the term self, they mean something entirely different. To the Secularist, the "self,"
or the self-aware individual, is the basic unit of human life. To New Spiritualists from a
Buddhist tradition, we must be rid of any sense of the
self. The self does not exist. To New Spiritualists from
some Hindu traditions, the "self" must be lost in the
Universal Self (called Brahman) in order to have mean-
ing. In the Bhagavad Gita, Krishna says, "He who has
let go of hatred, who treats all beings with kindness and
compassion, who is always serene, unmoved by pain or
pleasure, free of the 'I' and 'mine, self-controlled, firm
If Jesus is just an example,
not a savior, then the
Bible's description of
his life, death, and
resurrection, and indeed
entire purpose as savior, is
either wrong or irrelevant.
and patient, his whole mind is focused on me-that man
is the one I love best""36
But how do we free ourselves from "T" and "me" and from selfishness and ego? The answer,
from the perspective of New Spirituality, is twofold. First, people can free themselves daily
and temporarily through such practices as yoga and meditation. Second, New Spiritualists
believe people can be free forever through reincarnation: living their lives, dying, and being
reborn until they gradually become more enlightened. The Dalai Lama says, "The root cause
of our unenlightened existence within this cycle of rebirths-samsara in Sanskrit-is said to
be our fundamental ignorance: our grasping at a sense of self?
Between Buddhism and Hinduism, and even within various traditions in Buddhism, there
are differences in understanding and defining reincarnation. For the purposes of this chapter,
it is enough to understand reincarnation as the process by which the body passes away but the
soul continues its quest for enlightenment in other forms. It can be a very confusing thing to
understand, even for those who firmly believe it. The actress Shirley MacLaine, recalling the
birth of her daughter, mused, "When the doctor brought her to me in the hospital bed on that
afternoon in 1956, had she already lived many, many times betore, with other mothers? Hac
she, in fact, been one herself? Had she, in fact, ever been my mother? Was her one-hour-old
face housing a soul perhaps millions of years old?*38


<!-- page-6 (book p.133) -->

An additional auestion MacLaine should have asked is, "How would my daughter know the
answers to these questions?" Because if her birth was actually a rebirth, and she did not know
this, how could she ever live her life differently so as to move toward greater enlightenment?
To answer this question rather than believe in a God who sets the rules and judges people
accordingly, believers in reincarnation place their faith in karma, which is a law of causality
that says, very basically, good is returned to those who do good, and evil is returned to those
who do evil. In each successive lifetime, then, a person
must pay off his or her past karmic failings, suffering for
Karma: a concept found in
Eastern religions, karma
is the belief that good is
returned to those who do
good, and evil is returned
to those who do evil (either
in this life or the next.
and learning from past evils. Chief among these failings
is seeing ourselves as individuals. This separates us from
the consciousness of the universe.
In order to understand themselves (and their paths
to godhood), people must be cognizant of at least some
of their past lives. Gary Zukav explains: "If your soul
was a Roman centurion, an Indian beggar, a Mexican
mother, a nomad boy, and a medieval nun, among other
incarnations, for example, ... you will not be able to understand your proclivities, or inter-
ests, or ways of responding to different situations without an awareness of the experiences
of those lifetimes"* Reincarnation can serve little purpose unless people can know about
and learn from their past lives.
It is unclear, however, how if at all this awareness of previous lives takes place. It is also
unclear how we became separated from the oneness of the universe in the first place. Unless
our individual souls are somehow eternal, there must have been a first incarnation. But in
this first life, there could not have been any previous lives in which to collect karmic debts.
How, then, did we fall into individualism? New Spiritualists rarely address these questions,
except to suggest that we ask them because we are not
sufficiently enlightened not to.
Nirvana: a concept found
in Indian religions, nirvana
is the transcendent state
of ultimate peace and
highest happiness achieved
through one's release
from the bondages of
karma, suffering, worldly
desire, and individual
In any event, the end goal of reincarnation is to
be completely cleansed of karmic debt, thereby losing
individuality altogether in order to melt into the stream
of consciousness. In Buddhism, the word dukkha means
"suffering." The actual state of the final cessation of
suffering is called nirvana. The Dalai Lama says,
"Our
pursuit of this peaceful state of nirvana is a quest for
protection from the misery of samsara [cycle of re-
births]. and particularly from the afflictions such as
attachment and aversion that bind us within the vicious
cycle of rebirths."41
6. NEW SPIRITUALITY AS A WORLDVIEW
As we can see so far, New Spirituality proposes answers to many of life's questions, though
not necessarily coherent ones. New Spirituality proposes a theology ("God" is not a person
but a force), a philosophy (we can gain wisdom by getting in touch with our God nature), an
ethic (we can live best by avoiding those actions that would condemn us to more miserable
future lives), a biology (a view of what "life" is-consciousness, the universal mind, and so
forth, and a psychology (we can live in greater mental health if we are cleansed of ego) 42
As we will see throughout this book, from these starting points New Spiritualists propose
what kind of society we should have, how laws should be structured, which political system
is ideal, which economic system will produce wealth, how the flow of history has led us to
this place, and where we should go next.
As with the other worldviews we've explored, let's see if we can get a sense of New Spir-
ituality's understanding of both (1) general revelation, or what can be known and is obvious
to all, and (2) special revelation, or what must be specially revealed to us, since it cannot be
7. GENERAL REVELATION: SCIENCE AND NEW SPIRITUALITY
Science is focused on observing and explaining the physical universe. Christians see
the scientific method as a way of discovering God's design of the universe. Secularists
view science as a means for understanding the mechanics of the natural world. New Spir-
itualists, however, have an odd relationship with science. In their view, science has been
primarily an attempt to control nature for the benefit of human beings and has therefore
been a destructive enterprise. A proper view of science, they argue, would lead to a better
understanding of consciousness and a more harmonious relationship between human
beings and planet Earth.
To begin with, New Spiritualists dispense with the need for a first cause (God) by claiming
the universe was uncaused. As the Dalai Lama expresses it,
From a Buddhist point of view, the continuum of substantial causes preceding our
conception can be traced back to before the Big Bang, to when the universe was
a void. Actually, if we follow the line of reasoning by which we trace our contin-
uum back to before the Big Bang, we would have to acknowledge that there could
not be a first moment to the continuum of substantial causes of any conditioned
phenomenon.*3
In other words, the universe is eternal. It has no cause or beginning. There is no point
in looking for either.
The search for a cause of nature or the beginning of the universe has been fruitless, say
New Spiritualists, because it has proceeded from wrong assumptions. Based on a Christian
conception of God, says Marilyn Ferguson, early scientists like Isaac Newton saw the universe
as a finely tuned machine and hoped to "finally explain everything in terms of trajectories,
gravity, force. It would close in on the final secrets of a 'clockwork universe?**
But, say New Spiritualists, the idea of a mechanistic universe failed to explain the
universe as we now know it. Ouantum physics stepped into the gap, though. The father of
quantum theory, Max Planck, proposed that "matter absorbed heat energy and emitted
light energy discontinuous| » in energy packets, which Albert Einstein called "quanta "45
The behavior of matter according to quantum theory, cannot be neatly predicted or slotted
into mechanistic categories. The universe is more mysterious than we imagined, and this, to


<!-- page-7 -->

New Spiritualists, afirms the power of human consciousness to shape the universe rather
than merely obey its laws. As the physics professor in James Redfield's novel The Celestine
Prophecy phrases it,
The whole of Einstein's lifes work was to show that what we perceive as hard matter is
mostly empty space with a pattern of energy running through it. This includes ourselves.
And what quantum physics has shown is that... when you break apart small aspects
of this energy... the act of observation itself alters the results-as if these elementary
particles are influenced by what the experimenter expects.... In other words, the basic
stuff of the universe, at its core, is looking like a kind of pure energy that is malleable
to human intention and expectation in a way that defies our old mechanistic model
Humans can shape the universe? This would indeed upset the apple cart of science.
With these discoveries, says Marilyn Ferguson, "Our understanding of nature shifted from a
clockwork paradigm to an uncertainty paradigm, from the absolute to the relative?"47 In other
words, Ferguson believes, the latest scientific discoveries support New Spirituality beliefs.
The shift to this questionable new view of science is imperative, according to New Spir-
ituality advocates, because the desire to control nature has placed our planet in deep peril.
According to William Thompson, "The emergence of a scientific culture stimulates the de-
struction of nature, of the biosphere of relationships among plants, animals, and humans
that we have called 'Nature?"48
In 1979, scientist James Lovelock's book Gaia: A New Look at Life on Earth breathed
life into New Spirituality's fringe approach to science. Lovelock said, "Taken as a whole,
the planet behaves not as an inanimate sphere of rock and soil ... but more as a biological
superorganism—a planetary body—that adjusts and regulates itself. 49 Lovelock drew the
name Gaia from the ancient Greek goddess of the earth. Although he considers himself a
"positive agnostic" and has tried to distance his theory from any religious connotations, New
Spiritualists immediately promoted Lovelock's theory as scientific support for their worldview.
The idea of a symbiotic global network of conscious-
Gaia Hypothesis:
postulated by James
Lovelock, the Gaia
hypothesis is the theory
that all living organisms
form a collective, self-
regulating living entity.
ness, which all living things and planetary systems share,
departs radically from the idea that evolution occurs
through random-chance processes and the survival of
the fittest. The Gaia hypothesis emphasizes the coop-
erative spirit of the entire biosphere. The earth is not a
"dead" habitat that happens to support life, Lovelock
asserts, but a living, integrated system of soil, oceans,
wind, and living things working together in harmony
for the good of the whole.
The Gaia hypothesis visualizes the planet as a self regulating system, implying pur-
pose behind it all. While this may sound like intelligent design, an idea of great interest to
Christians, New Spiritualists deny Je semelligent, personal designer. To them, consciousness
was a feature of the universe before the unil rse itself even existed. There is no "who"
behind the "what."
Lovelock's vivid description of Gaia provided a
spiritual basis for the modern ecological movement
as well as the more radical offshoots of ecofeminism
(the linking of feminism and ecology to fight male
domination, which proponents say oppresses women
and exploits the planet's resources) and deep ecology
(the call for a radical restructuring of society based on
the idea that all living things, not just human beings,
should have legal rights). 50 Many ecologists, pointing
to signs of ecological imbalance, say we should be pay-
ing closer attention to our mother-Mother Earth-or
Gaia. Saving the planet is more than a moral imperative.
Ecofeminism: a political
philosophy that links the
oppression of women
and the exploitation of
the environment with
the values inherent
in what advocates
refer to as Western
patriarchal society.
8. SPECIAL REVELATION: HOW NEW
SPIRITUALISTS ANSWER THE ULTIMATE
QUESTIONS
Many have asked, "How do we know our assertions
about the nature of reality are actually true?" But few
New Spirituality teachers attempt to prove anything at all.
True, some refer to quantum physics and the mysteries
of the universe, but usually by way of creating room for
the possibility of their beliefs as opposed to positively
grounding them in truth. It is enough for many New
Spiritualists that they are in touch with a higher con-
sciousness; they believe their inner soul searching is the
only proof their arguments need.
In light of this, let's answer the five questions
we've focused on with each of the worldviews weve
considered:
Deep Ecology:
an environmental
philosophy based on the
idea that all living beings
form a spiritual and
ecologically interconnected
system, which is presently
threatened by the
harmful impact of human
beings; a philosophy
that advocates a radical
restructuring of society
toward environmental
preservation, simple living,
legal rights for all living
creatures, and a reduction
in the human population.
1. On what sources of revelation does New Spirituality draw?
2. What does New Spirituality say about humanity?
3. What does New Spirituality say is wrong with us?
4. What does New Spirituality say about how we should live?
5. How are we to understand other worldviews based on New Spirituality?
1. On what sources of revelation does New Spirituality draw? New Spirituality begins
by denying the preeminence of any purported special revelation over any other. That is, New
piritualists believe the Bible is no more a word from God than the Quran or the teachings of
Confucius. This is not to say they are held in equally high regard. New Age advocate David
Spangler says, "We can take all the scriptures, and all the teachings, and all the tablets, and


<!-- page-8 (book p.137) -->

all thelaws and all the marshmallows and have a jolly good bonfire and marshmallow roast,
because that is all they are worth."5l
So if there are no scriptures, what should we trust? Rhonda Byrne says simply, "Trust
the Universe. Trust and believe and have faith."52 She continues, "The truth is that the Uni-
verse has been answering you all of your life, but you cannot receive the answers unless
you are aware? The need is not for scripture but for awareness. But how do we achieve
this awareness?
Meditation, sometimes with crystals or mantras, is
often the method used to achieve a higher conscious-
Meditation: the art of
focusing one's mind to
induce a higher state of
ness. A writer in Life Times magazine states emphatically,
"My message to everyone now is to learn to meditate.
It was through meditation that many other blessings
came about 54
Another method is channeling, which refers to the
controversial New Spiritualist belief that disembodied
Channeling: the practice
of communicating with
disembodied spirits
through a medium.
spirits presumably speak to and through a gifted person
engaged in meditation. These spirits, it's assumed, have
greater awareness of consciousness because they are not
limited by an attachment to a finite body. Elena, a spirit
John Randolph Price allegedly channeled, describes be-
ings like herself as "angels of light—whether from earth or other worlds. They search, select
and guide those men and women who may be suitable subjects?" While all New Spiritualists
embrace meditation as an important tool for attaining higher consciousness, not all New
Spiritualists embrace channeling 56
Many New Spiritualists also point to near-death or out-of-body experiences as evidence
that their understanding of the true nature of reality is correct. Raymond Moody, Kenneth
Ring, and Melvin Morse are among the writers who claim that such experiences not only
verify the existence of consciousness beyond the grave but more specifically the nature of
spiritual experiences as described in other New Spiritualist writings.
Other practices New Spiritualists use include astrology, fire walking, Ouija boards, crystal
therapy, and aura readings. From a Christian viewpoint, these are occult practices condemned
in Scripture (Deut. 18:9-14 and Rev. 22:15), * but to New Spiritualists, such practices provide
useful insight into the nature of consciousness.
2. What does New Spirituality say about humanity? For Gary Zukav, consciousness,
not individual existence, is our ultimate nature as human beings:
part of All that is, you have literally always been, vet there was the instant when that
All that is can form itself into individual droplets of consciousness. Because you are
individual energy current that is you was formed. Consider that the ocean is God. It
has always been. Now reach in and grab a cup full of water. In that instant, the cup
becomes individual, but it has always been, has it not? This is the case with your soul.
There was the instant when you became a cup of energy, but it was of an immortal
original Being. You have always been because what it is that you are is God, or Divine
Inteligence, but God takes on individual forms, droplets, reducing its power to small
particles of individual consciousness."
Eckhart Tolle affirms this view when he refers to the consciousness of the universe
as "Presence" (capital P). All life forms, Tolle says, are "temporary manifestations of the
underlying one Life, one Consciousness"" All spiritual forces are "preparing the ground
for a more profound shift in planetary consciousness that is destined to take place in the
human species. This is the spiritual awakening that we are beginning to witness now?
For New Spiritualists, all knowledge exists in the
godlikeness within us. If we connect with a higher con-
sciousness, we transcend the limitations our physical
existence imposes on us. Jack Underhill explained what
would happen if everyone in the world were to connect
with his or her godhood:
They can turn off the sun and turn it back on. They
can freeze oceans into ice, turn the air into gold, talk
as one with no movement or sound. They can fly with-
For New Spiritualists,
all knowledge exists in
the godlikeness within
us. If we connect with a
higher consciousness, we
transcend the limitations
our physical existence
imposes on us.
out wings and love without pain, cure with no more
than a thought or a smile. They can make the earth
go backwards or bounce up and down, crack it in half or shift it around... There is
nothing they cannot do.62
This very high view of human potential is a consistent feature in New Spirituality writ-
ings. Rhonda Byrne says,
You are God in a physical body. You are Spirit in the flesh. You are Eternal Life ex-
pressing itself as You. You are a cosmic being. You are all power. You are all wisdom.
You are all intelligence. You are perfection. You are magnificence. You are the creator,
and you are creating the creation of You on this planet. 63
3. What does New Spirituality say is wrong with us? The very high view New Spiritualists
have of human potential is at odds with the traditional idea of human sinfulness expressed
in Romans 3:23: "All have sinned and fall short of the glory of God." To Deepak Chopra, one
benefit of the theory of evolution is to serve as "a blow against sin, the 'human stain' that
could be atoned for but would always return. Evolution opened a way to escape the trap of
sin by offering hope for progress in all aspects of life, although it took a long time for such
a humane implication to strike home? Chopra's understanding of evolution is at extreme
odds with the common view among scientists (that evolution is mindless and material, and
not intentionally moving in any particular direction), but what it means scientifically does
not seem to be as important to him as how useful it appears in counteracting the Christian
conception of the sin nature.
The real "sin" in New Spirituality, if there is such
a thing, is failing to understand the true nature of
consciousness. Eckhart Tolle says human beings have
an "inherited dysfunction, a collective mental illness
that creates suffering 65 "You do not become good br
trying to be good, but by finding the goodness that
The real "sin" in New
Spirituality, if there is
such a thing, is failing
to understand the true
nature of consciousness.
is already within you, and allowing that goodness to


<!-- page-9 (book p.139) -->

emerge, he says 'Burt an only emerge if something fundamental changes in your star
of consciousness 66
Tolle refers to this inherited dysfunction as "ego." It is a negative inner state that
makes us miserable and prevents our spiritual growth from producing true health and
understanding. It is possible to rid ourselves of it, Tolle writes: "To end the misery that
has afflicted the human condition for thousands of years, you have to start with yourself
and take responsibility for your inner state at any given moment. That means now. Ask
yourself, 'Is there negativity in me at this moment? »67
But if the individual's problem is negativity, and if society's problem is also negativity,
how might society change? New Spirituality advocates say we need mass consciousness.
Beverly Galyean says,
Once we begin to see that we are all God, that we all have the attributes of God,
then I think the whole purpose of human life is to reown the Godlikeness within
us; the perfect love, the perfect wisdom, the perfect understanding, the perfect
intelligence, and when we do that, we create back to that old, that essential oneness
which is consciousness.
Robert Muller says, "Only the unity of all can bring the well-being of all"69 The founder
of Transcendental Meditation (TM), Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, believed in gathering large
groups for meditation for the purpose of decreasing violent crime, warfare, and terrorism.
His followers call it the Maharishi Effect or Super Radiance.?
4. What does New Spirituality say about how we should live? The ideas of consciousness
and godlikeness radically change how people live. As we saw in the Bhagavad Gita, and as
is common in New Spiritualist writings, indifference to suffering is the basis of a good life.
Love and compassion actually make the problem worse; they bind us to pain and suffering,
prolonging negativity, individualism, and ego.
In contrast, Christianity teaches that we are obligated to help people in need. Proverbs
24:11-12 says, Rescue those who are being taken away to death; hold back those who are
stumbling to the slaughter. If you say, Behold, we did not know this; does not he who weighs
the heart perceive it? Does not he who keeps watch over your soul know it, and will he not
repay man according to his work?" James 4:17 affirms, "Whoever knows the right thing to
do and fails to do it, for him it is sin."
The law of karma, though, produces a very different
The traditional Hindu
resistance to interfering
with someone else's karma
kept Hindus from helping
the sick or improving the
lives of the downtrodden.
response from the biblical injunction. If a person's misery
helps cleanse him or her of negative karma, should we
help alleviate his or her suffering? Wouldn't this stop
short the cleansing process? The traditional Hindu re-
sistance to interfering with someone else's karma kept
Hindus from helping the sick or improving the lives of
the downtrodden. Jesus, on the other hand, illustrated
the idea of loving one's neighbor through the parable of
the good Samaritan, and he even denied that sin is the sole cause of sickness (John 9:1-5).
Combined with a vision of human beings as God's image bearers, these beliefs led Christians
to show compassion for the sick, the poor, and the needy.
These biblical teachings are in part what pricked the conscience of the revered Ma-
hatma Gandhi, a Hindu and humanitarian who was concerned with the needs of the
poor. Gandhi said it was Christian missionaries-not fellow Hindus-who "awakened
in him a revulsion for the caste system and for the maltreatment of outcastes" He acted
inconsistently with his Hindu presuppositions and instead incorporated a biblical system
of ethics.
According to New Spirituality, then, if something is wrong, it is because you will it so;
if you're sick, it is because you want to be sick; if you're poor, it's because you want to be
poor; if you get in an accident, it is because you wanted to be hurt. The way forward is to
rid yourself of negativity, individualism, and ego. Rhonda Byrne states it emphatically: "You
cannot 'catch' anything unless you think you can, and thinking you can is inviting it to you
with your thought."™ Aloofness to the human plight, not compassion or salvation, is the New
Spiritualist approach.
5. How are we to understand other worldviews based on New Spirituality? New Spiritualists
teach that all religions are alike in what really matters.7 This wishful thinking is popular today.
Perhaps you've heard, "We're really all saying the same thing; what is all the fighting about?"
Many people are unaware that in expressing this belief, they have been influenced by the
compelling work of professor and writer Joseph Campbell,
who rose to popularity through a film series and a book
titled The Power of Myth. In The Hero with a Thousand
Faces (1949), Campbell discussed the monomyth cycle of
the hero's journey, a pattern, he claims, found in many cul-
tures. The monomyth involves the hero receiving a "call to
adventure" and passing "threshold guardians" (often with
the aid of a wise mentor or spirit guide) before entering a
dream-like world. There, after a series of trials, the hero
achieves the object of his quest-often an atonement with
the father, a sacred marriage, or an apotheosis (elevation
to divine status. He then returns home?
Monomyth: popularized
by Joseph Campbell, a
monomyth is the theory
that cultures throughout
time have shared a
common theme within
their popular stories-
the "hero's journey,"
which unfolds in three
distinct acts: the hero's
departure, initiation, and
triumphant return.
For Campbell, almost all hero myths-religious and
secular, throughout history and across cultures-con-
tained at least a subset of these patterns. Thus, all religions told the same story. As you can
imagine, Campbell's work has been profoundly influential in Hollywood among those who
want to tap in to filmgoers' deep beliefs in order to give the stories true staying power.
Still, despite the commitment to radical pluralism, New Spiritualists can be quite critical
of religion, especially those belief that focus on sin and salvation. Any such approach is
"utopian"
according to Eckhart Tolle, and it just makes the problem worse: "At the core of all
utopian visions lies one of the main structural dysfunctions of the old consciousness: looking
to the future for salvation. The only existence the future actually has is as a thought form in
your mind. so when vou look to the future for salvation, vou are unconsciously looking to
your own mind for salvation. You are trapped in form, and that is ego""75


<!-- page-10 (book p.141) -->

In the end, in spite of its attempts at transcending differences in order to pursue mass
consciousness, New Spirituality does try to argue the shortcomings of other worldviews. Weve
already covered New Spiritualit's criticism of Christianitys emphasis on sin and salvation.
What are its criticisms of other worldviews?
Secularism. According to the Bhagavad Gita, Secularism is demonic. One refrain ad-
dresses it specifically:
They say that life is an accident caused by sexual desire,
that the universe has no moral order, no truth, no God.
Clinging to this stupid belief, drawn into cruelty and malice,
they become lost souls and, at last, enemies of the whole world.
Driven by insatiable lusts, drunk on the arrogance of power,
hypocritical, deluded, their actions foul with self-seeking.
Tormented by a vast anxiety that continues until their death,
convinced that the gratification of desire is life's sole aim,
Bound by a hundred shackles of hope, enslaved by their greed,
they squander their time dishonestly piling up mountains of wealth.?
As you might expect, people who believe in consciousness as ultimate reality reject the
idea that the human brain is, in the words of artificial-intelligence pioneer Marvin Minsky,
"just a computer that happens to be made out of meat? Deepak Chopra considers such
blatant Secularism to be no better than the religious systems he rejects: "I am less concerned
with attacks on God than I am with a far more insidious danger: the superstition of material-
ism" He's right to be concerned. If, as the Secularist claims, materialism (only matter exists)
and naturalism (everything has a natural explanation) are correct, then New Spirituality is
untrue by definition.
Marxism. As we discussed earlier, Eckhart Tolle sees humans as cursed with an "inherited
dysfunction, a collective mental illness that creates suffering? When people try to change
the world without first changing their state of consciousness, it always ends in disaster:
The history of Communism, originally inspired by noble ideals, clearly illustrates what
happens when people attempt to change external reality-create a new earth— without
any prior change in their inner reality, their state of consciousness. They make plans
without taking into account the blueprint for dysfunction that every human being
carries within: the ego.
Utopian visions will always fail, according to New Spirituality, if they attempt to succeed.
by changing physical structures. Remember, New Spirituality's ultimate reality is conscious-
ness. Ignore this and you'll be wrong about everything else.
Islam. Although New Spiritualists claim to be aloof to both pain and pleasure, some
spiritual teachers cannot help but notice that very old cultures, such as Islam, seem to thrive
by inflicting pain on others. Tolle's expladation for this is as follows: "Because of the human
tendency to perpetuate old emotion, almost everyone carries in his or her energy field an
accumulation of old emotional pain, which I call 'the pain-body? "81 Tolle says, "In some nations,
for example, in the Middle East, the collective pain-body is so acute that a significant part of
the population finds itself forced to act it out in an endless and insane cycle of perpetration
and retribution through which the pain-body renews itself continuously*
Until Islam releases its need to be right, to proclaim absolute truth, and to attempt to
cause others to fall in line with its presuppositions, New Spiritualists think it will be part of
the problem rather than part of the solution. Some New Spiritualists committed to finding
the common core in all religions turn to a twelfth-century Islamic teacher named Averroes
(also called Ibn Rushd), whose teachings are carried on today in the writing and speaking of
followers of Sufism, a mystical cult of Islam. But such thinking is confined to a tiny percentage
of Muslims, and the Muslim community at large generally disdains its adherents.
9. CONCLUSION
New Spirituality is an identifiable pattern of ideas, beliefs, values, and convictions.
Despite New Spirituality's shaky science, unwillingness to provide evidence for its claims,
indifference to the human condition, and an often muddled and insubstantial basis for
belief, tens of millions of people in America and hundreds of millions around the world
embrace this worldview and its answers to lifes ultimate questions. New Spirituality can
be found all around us: in movies and music, on television, in our neighborhoods, and in
our schools.
Although it stands in direct contrast to the Christian
worldview in many ways, New Spirituality catches many
Christians off guard through its constant references to
God and Jesus Christ as a teacher of consciousness and
an example of what we all have the potential to become.
Christianity, in contrast, is not about needing a teacher or
example. It is about our need, as sinners guilty before God,
for a savior. The gospel of John records a conversation in
which Jesus told his disciples, "I am the way, and the truth,
and the life. No one comes to the Father except through
me" (14:6). Confused, one of Jesus's disciples, Philip, re-
plied, "Lord, show us the Father" In response, Jesus said,
"Truly, truly, I say to you, whoever believes in me will
also do the works that I do; and greater works than these
Although it stands in
direct contrast to the
Christian worldview
in many ways, New
Spirituality catches
many Christians off
guard through its
constant references
to God and Jesus
Christ as a teacher of
consciousness and an
example of what we all
have the potential
to become.
will he do, because I am going to the Father. Whatever
you ask in my name, this I will do, that the Father may be
goried in the Son (v. 12-13aytl we we acknowledge Jesus as savior will we find
our true callings ambassadors of truth, grace, love, and compassion in a hurting world.


<!-- page-11 (book p.143) -->

ENDNOTES
1. Adapted from Bhagavad Gita, trans. Stephen Mitchell (New York: Three Rivers, 2000).
2. Hinduism is actually a religious culture that, according to Taylor University professor of philosophy and religion
Winfried Corduan, "has moved back and forth through various phases of monotheism, henotheism, polytheism
and animism, with each stage retaining at least a vestigial presence in the ensuing one. There is no set of core
beliefs that remain constant throughout. The name itself, actually a label devised by Westerners, simply means the
religion of India." Winfried Corduan, Neighboring Faiths: A Christian Introduction to World Religions (Downers Grove,
IL: IVP Academic, 2012), 267. See also R. C. Zaehner, Hinduism (New York: Oxford University Press, 1983). Hinduism
is primarily spread today through the practice of yoga, a meditational exercise. Whether this is harmful or not is
the subject of much debate in the Christian community. For more information, see Albert Mohler's podcast "The
Meaning of Yoga: A Conversation with Stephanie Syman and Doug Groothuis," "Thinking in Public," September
20, 2010, www.albertmohler.com/2010/09/20/the-meaning-of-yoga-a-conversation-with-stephanie-syman-and-
doug-groothius/.
3. First Corinthians 15:3-4: "I delivered to you as of first importance what I also received: that Christ died for our
sins in accordance with the Scriptures, that he was buried, that he was raised on the third day in accordance with
the Scriptures"; 1 Corinthians 15:14: "If Christ has not been raised, then our preaching is in vain and your faith is
in vain"; 1 Corinthians 15:17-19: "If Christ has not been raised, your faith is futile and you are still in your sins. Then
those also who have fallen asleep in Christ have perished. If in Christ we have hope in this life only, we are of all
people most to be pitied."
4. Deepak Chopra and Leonard Mlodinow, War of the Worldviews: Where Science and Spirituality Meet-and Do Not (New
York: Three Rivers, 2011), 304.
5. Rhonda Byrne, The Secret (New York: Atria Books, 2006), 113.
6. See Ken Wilber, The Integral Vision: A Very Short Introduction to the Revolutionary Integral Approach to Life, God, the
Universe, and Everything (Boston: Shambhala, 2007).
7. New Spiritualist writers often refer to Jesus in a very positive but unbiblical way. Most see Jesus as a good man who
managed to transcend ego and thus serves as an example worth following. Others refer to "Christ consciousness" as
what made Jesus unique and as something we may also attain through various New Spiritualist practices. For more
information see Douglas Groothuis, Jesus in an Age of Controversy (Eugene, OR: Wipf and Stock, 2002).
8. Fan interview with Larry and Andy Wachowski, "Wachowski Brothers Chat Transcript," MatrixFans.net, November
6, 1999, www.matrixfans.net/miscellaneous/wachowski-brothers-chat-transcript/#sthash.q4ohMZGm.dpbs.
9. The extent of Marilyn Ferguson's influence on Al Gore is unclear, but it is widely known that he was a fan of the
book and invited Ferguson to visit the White House while he was vice president.
10. Rick Warren is a pastor and author in California whose book The Purpose Driven Life became a sensation, selling
approximately thirty million copies and becoming one of the bestselling nonfiction books of all time.
11. Chopra and Mlodinow, War of the Worldviews, 6.
12. Robert C. Fuller, Spiritual, but Not Religious (New York: Oxford University Press, 2001), 5-6.
13. Alexander W. Astin et al., Spirituality and the Professoriate: A National Study of Faculty Beliefs, Attitudes, and Behaviors (Los
Angeles, CA: Higher Education Research Institute, 2005).
14. "The Watkins Review Announces Its Spiritual 100 List, Market Wired, March 29, 2011, accessed February 10, 2016,
www.marketwire.com/press-release/The-Watkins-Review-Announces-Its-Spiritual-100-List-1418721.htm.
15. Eckhart Tolle, A New Earth: Awakening to Your Life's Purpose (New York: Plume, 2005), 277.
16. Bill Moyers, "Cinema: Of Myth and Men; A Conversation between Bill Moyers and George Lucas," Time, April 26,
1999, 92.
17. Quote attributed to George Lucas, in "George Lucas: Heroes, Myths, and Magic," American Masters, January 13,
2004, www.pbs.org/wnet/americanmasters/database/lucas_g.html.
18. Chopra and Mlodinow, War of the Worldviews, 264-65.
19. For more on Schaeffe's thoughts on God's nature, see He Is There and He Is Not Silent, one of the books in The
Francis A. Schaeffer Trilogy (Wheaton, IL: Crossway Books, 1990), 290.
20. The Dalai Lama, A Profound Mind (New York: Three Rivers, 2011), 93-94.
21. Dalai Lama, A Profound Mind.
22. Chopra and Mlodinow, War of the Worldviews, 17.
23. Chopra and Mlodinow, War of the Worldviews, 43.
24. John Bradshaw, Bradshaw on the Family (Deerfield Beach, FL: Health Communications, 1988), 230.
25. Ruth Montgomery, A World Beyond (New York: Fawcett Crest, 1971), 8-9.
26. John White, ed., What Is Enlightenment? (Los Angeles: J. P. Tarcher, 1984), 126.
27. Meher Baba, The Mastery of Consciousness, comp, and ed. Allan Y. Cohen (New York: Harper and Row, 1977), 23.
28. Quoted in F. LaGard Smith, Out on a Broken Limb (Eugene, OR: Harvest House, 1986), 181.
29. Tolle, New Earth, 299-300.
30. Byrne, Secret, 155.
31. Byrne, Secret, 9.
32. Byrne, Secret, 11.
33. John White, "A Course in Miracles: Spiritual Wisdom for the New Age," Science of Mind 10 (1986).
34. John White, The Meeting of Science and Spirit (New York: Paragon House, 1990), 217.
35. For a discussion of the history and research on "the self," see Paul C. Vitz, "The Embodied Self: Evidence from
Crisis (Wilmington, DE: ISI Books, 2006), 113-27.
Cognitive Psychology and Neuropsychology in Paul C. Vitz and Susan M. Felch, eds., The Self: Beyond the Postmodern
36. Bhagavad Gita, 147.
37. Dalai Lama, Profound Mind, 22.
38. Quoted in Smith, Out On a Broken Limb, 12.
39. The Dalai Lama (Profound Mind, 16) calls karma a "law of causality." In the Hindu tradition, the law is called
dharma, and the word karma is used to refer to a set of actions one undertakes to comply with dharma.
40. Gary Zukav, The Seat of the Soul (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1999), 29.
41. Dalai Lama, Profound Mind, 45.
42. Strictly speaking, most New Spiritualist viewpoints deny the reality of the world of space, time, and matter.
For example, in some Hindu traditions, the idea that there are natural processes is part of the illusion called maya.
Although maya is used in many different ways in Hindu writings, it often refers to the idea that ultimate reality is
incomprehensible through human plans, categories, and concepts.
43. Dalai Lama, Profound Mind, 69.
44. Marilyn Ferguson, The Aquarian Conspiracy (Los Angeles: J. P. Tarcher, 1980), 26-27.
45. For an explanation of how New Spiritualists claim quantum theory in support of their views, see Douglas
Groothuis, Unmasking the New Age (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity, 1986), 94-105.
46. James Redfield, The Celestine Prophecy (New York: Warner Books, 1993), 41-42.
47. Ferguson, Aquarian Conspiracy, 27.
48. William Irwin Thompson, "Nine Theses for a Gaia Politique," In Context 14 (Autumn 1986): 58, www.context.org
/CLIB/IC14/Thompson.htm.
49. Quoted in John P. Newport, The New Age Movement and the Biblical Worldview (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1998), 287.
50. For more information, see E. Calvin Beisner, "The Competing World Views of Environmentalism and Christianity,"
Cornwall Alliance, accessed March 26, 2014, www.cornwallalliance.org/docs/THECOM-1.PDF.
51. David Spangler, Reflections on the Christ (Forres, Scotland: Findhorn, 1982), 73.
52. Byrne, Secret, 57.
53. Byrne, Secret, 172.
54. "The Joys and Frustrations of Being a Healer," Life Times 1, no. 3 (n.d.): 61.
55. John Randolph Price, The Superbeings (Austin, TX: Quartus Books, 1981), 51-52.
56. Not all who embrace meditation embrace channeling, but all who embrace channeling seem to begin with
meditation. Kathleen Vande Kieft says, "Almost without exception, those who channel effectively meditate
regularly. The process of channeling itself is an extension of the state of meditation... The best way to prepare,
then, for channeling is by meditation. Kathleen Vande Kieft, Innersource: Channeling Your Unlimited Self (New York:
Ballantine Books, 1988), 114.
57. For more information, see J. I samu Yamamoto (a Christian researcher on cults and world religions) "The Near Death
Experience (Parts 1 and 2]," Christian Research Institute, Tune 10, 2009 accessed March 26, 2014, www.equip.org/articles
the-near-death-experience-part-one/and www.equip.org/articles/the-near-death-experience-part-two/.
58. Deuteronomy 18:9-14: "When you come into the land that the Lord your God is giving you, you shall not learn
to follow the abominable practices of those nations. There shall not be found among you anyone who burns his son
or his daughter as an offering envone who practices divination or tells fortunes or interprets omens, or a sorcerer
or a charmer or a medium or a necromancer or one who inquires of the dead, for whoever does these things is an
abomination to the LORD. And hope these abominations the Top Cd ding them out before you
You shall be blameless before the LoRd your God, for these nations, which you are about to dispossess, listen to
fortune-tellers and to diviners. But as for you, the Lord your God has not allowed you to do this"; Revelation 22:15:
and practices falsehood."
"Outside are the dogs and sorcerers and the sexually immoral and murderers and idolaters, and everyone who loves
59. Zukav, Seat of the Soul, 85-86.
60. Tolle, New Earth, 4.
61. Tolle, New Earth, 5.
63. Byrne, Secret, 164.
62. Jack Underhill, "My Goal in Life." Life Times (Winter 19861087). 00.
65. Tolle, New Earth, 8-9.
64, Chopra and Mlodinow, War of the Worldiers, 152.


<!-- page-12 (book p.144) -->

66. Tolle, New Earth, 13.
67. Tolle, New Earth, 116.
68. Quoted in Francis Adeney, "Educators Look East," SCP Journal (Winter 1981): 29. SCP Journal is published by
Spiritual Counterfeits Project, PO Box 4308, Berkeley, CA 94704.
69. Quoted in Benjamin B. Ferencz and Ken Keyes Jr., PlanetHood (Coos Bay, OR: Vision Books, 1988), 92.
70. Robert M. Oates, Permanent Peace (Fairfield, IA: Institute of Science, Technology, and Public Policy, 2002), 5, 12.
71. John Warwick Montgomery, Human Rights and Human Dignity (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1986), 113.
72. Byrne, Secret, 132.
73. Philosophers use the terms esotericism or perennialism in reference to the claim that all religions teach the same
thing. It is an essential teaching of New Spirituality, as is evident particularly in the writings of Ken Wilber. See, for
example, Integral Vision.
74. Joseph Campbell, The Hero with a Thousand Faces (Novato, CA: New World Library, 2008).
75. Tolle, New Earth, 308.
76. Bhagavad Gita, 171.
77. Quoted in Brad Darrach, "Meet Shaky, the First Electronic Person," Life, November 20, 1970, 68.
78. Chopra and Mlodinow, War of the Worldviews, 9.
79. Tolle, New Earth, 8-9.
80. Tolle, New Earth, 13.
81. Tolle, New Earth, 140.
82. Tolle, New Earth, 158.
