# Chapter 10

<!-- page-1 (book p.10) -->

1. JEAN VALJEAN AND THE STUDY OF RIGHT AND
WRONG
The door opened. A singular and violent group made
its appearance on the threshold. Three men were hold-
ing a fourth man by the collar. The three men were
gendarmes; the other was Jean Valjean.
A brigadier of gendarmes, who seemed to be in com-
mand of the group, was standing near the door. He
entered and advanced to the Bishop, making a military
salute.
In the meantime, Monseigneur Bienvenu had advanced
as quickly as his great age permitted. "Ah! Here you
are!" he exclaimed, looking at Jean Valjean.


<!-- page-2 -->

"I am glad to see you. Will, but how is this? T gave you the candlesticks too, which are of
silver like the rest, and for which you can certainly get two hundred francs. Why did you
not carry them away with your forks and spoons?"
Jean Valjean opened his eyes wide, and stared at the venerable Bishop with an expression
which no human tongue can render an account of.
"Monseigneur" said the brigadier of gendarmes, "so what this man said is true, then?
We came across him. He was walking like a man who is running away. We stopped him
to look into the matter. He had this silver-"
"And he told you, interposed the Bishop, with a smile, "that it had been given to him by
a kind old fellow of a priest with whom he had passed the night? I see how the matter
stands. And you have brought him back here? It is a mistake."
"In that case, replied the brigadier, "we can let him go?"
"Certainly, replied the Bishop.
Jean Valjean was trembling in every limb. He took the two candlesticks mechanically,
and with a bewildered air.
"Jean Valjean, my brother, you no longer belong to evil, but to good. It is your soul that
I buy from you; I withdraw it from black thoughts and the spirit of perdition, and I give
it to God""
The Jean Valjean character in Victor Hugo's Les Misérables was a broken, bitter man, a
known thief who would surely rot in prison. Forgiven through an unexpected act of mercy,
though, Valjean was eventually driven to repentance. Hugo's story bears witness to the universal
reality of evil and injustice, and also to the possibility of hope and goodness. The popularity of
Les Misérables-whether in book form, on stage, or in the movies-raises a hope to whichall
humanity clings: brutality must give way in the face of redemption. This is perhaps the most
important thing that may be said about ethical living and, consequently, the study of ethics.
The study of right and wrong, or ethics- from the Greek word ethos, meaning "goodness"-
has two functions. First, it is a guide to action. Ethics seeks to answer the question "How should
we live?" That is, what does it mean to live a good life-and not just a life that feels good,
but a life that actually is good? And if everyone lived this way, would it be good for all of us?
Second, ethics proposes a way to think through what life is about. Famed journalist
Walter Lippmann said, "At the core of every moral code there is a picture of human nature,
a map of the universe, and a version of history. To human nature (of the sort conceived),
in a universe (of the kind imagined), after a history
Ethics: the study of moral
conduct, values, duties,
and goodness.
(so understood, the rules of the code apply" Ethics
is more than a guide for how to live. It has the clari-
fying effect of shining light on life's most important
questions; indeed, many of those questions are unan-
swerable without it.
Christianity says all things good, true, and beautiful are based in God's character a
revealed in nature and Scripture. We ought to speak truth not because we'll feel better abou
it or because it is reasonable to do so but because Gods nature is truth. We ought to pursue
iustice not because it helps us maintain power or because the law commands it but because
God is just. We ought to express mercy not because it will make us happy or because it is our
duty but because God is mercy.
Because God is everywhere, Christianity says, an ethical system based on his character will
reside in every soul, across all cultures, at all times. Calvin D. Linton, one-time professor at
George Washington University, found that, in fact, such a basic pattern of ethical codes exists:
There is a basic pattern of similarity among ethical codes]. Such things as murder,
lying, adultery, cowardice are, for example, almost always condemned. The universality
of the ethical sense itself (the "oughtness" of conduct), and the similarities within the
codes of diverse cultures indicate a common moral heritage for all mankind which
materialism or naturalism cannot explain.
Christians see common ethical systems among vastly different cultures as evidence of a
universal law and thus a universal lawgiver. Every ethical system must either explain away
such evidence or account for it. In this chapter we will seek insight into the key terms and
players in the field of ethics and offer an overview of the ethical theories of the six worldviews
we are studying. Hopefully by the end we'll better understand why people do what they do,
and we'll better understand Christian ethics.
2. A PRIMER ON ETHICS
The difference between morality and ethics. To begin, let's clarify the difference between
morality and ethics. Morality refers to a personal system of determining rights and wrongs
based on some standard —what we prefer, what we think is good, or what we feel duty bound
to do. Ethics is the "philosophical study of morality. Morality is a container of right and
wrong. Ethics is the study of how such a container is discovered and used. In most univer-
sities, the study of ethics is a subset of philosophy and is sometimes called moral philosophy.
Morality and ethics are intertwined. Personally we may proclaim our desire to "live
and let live" but societies can't function very well this way. In reality, Cambridge professor
Simon Blackburn says, "We prefer that our preferences
are shared?"" Sometimes Christians are criticized as in-
tolerant busybodies who make rules about other peoples
business. However, intolerance works both ways. Those
Morality: a personal
standard of determining
right and wrong.
who become angry at restrictions on which gender of
person they may marry are often delighted to support
policies requiring employers to provide contraception and abortion services to their employees.
Contemplating tricky questions about moral rights and wrongs goes back, at least, t
Confucius in China, Moses in the Middle East, and Socrates in Greece. Whether in monas
teries, at universities, or at sidewalk cafes, the nature of right and wrong is one of humanity's
most widely discussed subjects.
Two theories about ethics. In his highly respected text, Introduction to Ethics, University
of Texas professor John Deigh places all ethical theories into one of two categories, teleological
and deontological. Let's define and explain these terms in light of the history of ethical studies.


<!-- page-3 -->

Theories about ends (teleology): What is the good life? The first category of ethica
theory is teleological (telos is Greek for "end" or "purpose"). Teleological theories judge ac.
tions as right or wrong by their ends, or purposes, those desired and intended consequences
that their actions will lead to. Teleological ethics ask questions like "What is the good life?"
"What is the purpose or end of a good life?" and "How might the good life be secured for as
many people as possible?"
Teleological theories say having a good "soul" is what life is all about. Everyone wants
happiness and peace. If they find it, they'll be good and then society will be good. Some
philosophers who thought of ethics this way include the following:
PHILOSOPHER
NAME OF PHILOSOPHY
DESCRIPTION
Aristippus
Hedonism
Human beings should maximize their own
personal pleasure.
Aristotle
Eudaimonism
The purpose of human existence is to live a
life of flourishing."
Jeremy Bentham
Utilitarianism
What is ethical is to pursue the greatest
good for the greatest number of people.
Thomas Hobbes
Ethical egoism
The good life is being free to look after one's
own interests.
John Stuart Mill
Ethical libertarianism
People live best when they have liberty but
agree to not harm others.
Friedrich Nietzsche
Moral skepticism
Objective moral knowledge is either inac-
cessible or impossible.
John Dewey
Pragmatism
Since truth is whatever works, morality is
whatever is useful for society.
Since we create our own meaning, we ought
Jean-Paul Sartre
Existentialism
to do whatever helps us become our most
authentic selves.
* We include Aristotles teleology here for the sake of showing various views through time. But as ethicist Scott
Rae points out, Aristote's teleology is focused on the good end of a human being, whereas the other philosophies
focus on the good end of human actions. Being versus doing is an important ethical distinction.
Everyone wants a meaningful life in harmony with others, right? This makes sense to
philosophers and nonphilosophers alike. But one problem for this kind of ethical theory is tha
people can (and often do) behave against their own best interests, acting out of anger, envy,
and spite, even when these reactions are irrational and produce misery. A second problem is
that we are not always able to accurately predict the ends of our thoughts and actions. Ever
the wisest cannot see all ends" Gandalf tells Frodo, in the Lord of the Rings trilogy, about his
wish to kill Gollum. Our best intentions team peactually lead to our contentment or stability
for society. A third problem is that actions (like murder or stealing or hiding the truth) might
have good intentions and might even produce outcomes we find valuable but turn out to be
evil. Saying "the ends justify the ect ans" has led to some of history's greatest evils
Theories about duty (deontology): What ought we to do? The second category of ethical
theories is called deontological (deon is Greek for "duty"). Where teleological theories determine
right and wrong by the desired ends of an action, deontological theories say that whether
we like it or not, we "ought" to do what is right- merely because right is right. Deontological
ethics rests on the belief that right and wrong actually exist independent of our situations
or circumstances. The ethical question is how we might understand right and wrong and do
what's right. Deontological philosophers include the following:
PHILOSOPHER
NAME OF PHILOSOPHY
Immanuel Kant
Transcendental idealism
René Descartes
Rationalism
DESCRIPTION
Our duty as humans is to figure out
what is good without qualification and
then pursue it.
God has made us as thinking beings, so
we must use our reasoning ability to live
virtuously.
Deontological theories are very compelling to those who have a conviction that truth is
absolute. But if ethical absolutes exist, why do so many people seem oblivious to them? And
if absolutes are truly absolute, like the law of gravity, how can people ignore them without
suffering any obvious negative consequences? Plus, what do we do when ethical absolutes
come into conflict with one another?
Conflicts between ethical absolutes are more common than we might think. Most peo-
ple understand the importance of telling the truth. They know human life is valuable. But if
they lived in 1940s Poland and were hiding Jews in their
homes, how would they resolve the potential conflict
between the two? If the Nazis came to your door and
asked,"Are you hiding any Jews?" what should you say?
To say no would be to tell an untruth, but to say yes would
be to condemn to death those under your protection. It
is an ethical dilemma.
Deontological Ethics:
any ethical system that
judges the morality
of actions based upon
some principle of duty.
For most people, the answer seems obvious, at least
in theory: Look the Nazis in the face and mislead them. They are not owed the truth. Their
laws are unjust, and the Nazis deserve to be defeated in their aims. But every aspect of
this decision-what is owed, whatly of us!s, what laws are, what constitutes Justice, what
means to be deserving, whether someone should be defeated, and how to discern the
proper aims of authority-must be based on some standard of right and wrong. In fact,
there are instances in the Old Testament where people misled evil authorities and seem
to have been commended for doing so. See, for example, Exodus 1 in which the Hebrew
midwives in Egypt refused to kill male babies as instructed, and in the book of Joshu:
where Rahab hid the Hebrew spies and misled the authorities of Jericho who were trying


<!-- page-4 -->

to capture them, and 1 Samuel 16 when God told Samuel to use deception when he went
to anoint a new king.
Ethical dilemmas like these may be infrequent, but they do happen. In World War I,
Corrie ten Boom decided to defy the Nazis and hide Jews in her home. During the Cold
War, Brother Andrew decided to defy the laws of communist countries and smuggle Bibles
across their borders. During the civil rights movement, Martin Luther King Jr. decided to
defy segregation laws and refrain from violence when attacked for doing so. Today, people
rescue slaves from sex traffickers in defiance of the law. They share their Christian faith in
countries where the laws specifically prohibit them from doing so.
A true theory of ethics ought to be livable for human
beings in a sinful world where right is not always obvious
A true theory of ethics
ought to be livable for
human beings in a sinful
world where right is not
always obvious and not
always easy to live out.
and not always easy to live out. A true theory of ethics
must help us recognize that not everything legal is right
and that an unjust law has no purpose if it defies the law
of God. A true theory of ethics must take into account a
higher law if lower laws are not to tyrannize us.
As we'll see shortly, Christianity, while not fitting
neatly into either teleological or deontological categories,
helps resolve these dilemmas. But first let's examine the ethical theories of each of the six
worldviews in our study, starting with Secularism.
3. SECULARISM
Secularist Austin Dacey from the Center for Inquiry says, "Most of us would find it
extremely difficult to do without the idea that there are objective standards of what makes
a life go well, that we can be mistaken about what makes a life go well, and that it is hugely
important that we not make such mistakes." But even the idea of "life going well" involves
an ethical judgment. On what basis can we define well? To the Secularist, such judgments
may be made as long as the reasons for doing so are completely naturalistic. George Jacob
Holyoake, in his 1846 book English Secularism, said, "Secularism is a code of duty pertaining
to this life, founded on considerations purely human, and intended mainly for those who
find theology indefinite or inadequate, unreliable or unbelievable?"
Simply put, Secularism binds itself to a purely naturalistic explanation of ethics. "We
have not found authoritative ethical prescriptions built into the order of things, writes Simon
Blackburn. "No god wrote the laws of good behavior into the cosmos. Nature has no concern
for good or bad, right or wrong? If nature has no concern, humans certainly do and are thus
the only source of ethics according to Secularism. Max Hocutt elaborate: The fundamental
question of ethics is, who makes the rules? God or men? The theistic answer is that God makes
them. The humanistic answer is that men make them. This distinction between theism and
humanism is the fundamental division in moral theory."o
If there is no higher authority than human beings, Secularist ethics will almost always
end up being seen as relativistic to on q an pua cumstances or cultural practices, or blanket
decisions will be made about what is the greatest good for the greatest number of people.
Thus, we suggest that Secularist ethics will either be moral relativism or utilitarianism.
What are the Secularists resources for making these judgments? Must we all, as poet
Ella Wheeler Wilcox phrased it, "worship at the shrine of brain"?" We have no choice, say
Blackburn, but never fear: "If we are careful, and mature, and imaginative, and fair, and nice,
and lucky, the moral mirror in which we gaze at ourselves may not show us saints. But it
need not show us monsters, either. 2 But terms like mature and fair are fraught with ethical
weight. What do they mean, and who gets to define them?
Secularists know we must make ethical choices based on something, but they are lost when
it comes to identifying any source of how to do this without devolving into complete moral
relativism. Jean-Paul Sartre expressed this poignantly in Existentialism and Human Emotions:
The existentialist ... thinks it very distressing that God does not exist, because all pos-
sibility of finding values in a heaven of ideas disappears along with Him; there can
no longer be an a priori Good, since there is no infinite and perfect consciousness to
think it. Nowhere is it written that the Good exists, that we must be honest, that we
must not lie; because the fact is we are on a plane where there are only men.!?
The picture is of a besieged humanity desperate for guidance, who, upon finding none,
chooses to bravely press on in its absence.
In practice, though, Secularists do not abandon the search for well-placed ethical anchors.
Despite their various disagreements, Secularists gravitate toward explaining ethical impulses
as emerging from evolutionary processes. Richard Weikart explains:
Many argued that by providing a naturalistic account of the origin of ethics and
morality, Darwinism delivered a death-blow to the prevailing Judeo-Christian ethics,
as well as Kantian ethics and any other fixed moral code. If morality was built on
social instincts that changed over evolutionary time, then morality must be relative
to the conditions of life at any given time. Darwinism-together with other forms
of historicism ascendant in the nineteenth century-thus contributed to the rise of
moral relativism. 14
Having settled on social instincts derived through evolutionary processes, many Secularists
find themselves intrigued by the work of E. O. Wilson in a feld called sociobiology. Sociobiolo-
Bis seek to explain, based on evolution, why people do what they do. Mothers with a genetic
Impulse to protect their offspring have been more likely to have their ofspring survive, for
example, and this explains why human mothers will run to the aid of their crying children.
Because they are convinced of naturalism and evolution, many Secularists see supernatu-
ral explanations as not only wrong but inherently dangerous. Paul Kurtz, author of Humanist
Manifesto II, stated, "The traditional ysıpernaturalistic moral commandments are especially
repressive of our human needs They YL waybral insofar as they foster illusions about human
destiny [the afterlifel and suppress vital inclinations"15 By Kurtz's account, then, religious
ethical codes such as the Ten Commandments prevent us from fulfilling our conception of
Lan morality be achieved without the foundation of absolute religious beliefs? Secularists
hope so, but they have difficulty agreentg on what morality means without God. The need for
a consistent Secularist ethical standarie, was the impetus for Morris B. Storer's DOOK Humanis
Ethics. Storer summed up the tensions Secularists feel as they grapple with ethical issues:


<!-- page-5 (book p.233) -->

Many Secularists see
supernatural explanations
as not only wrong but
inherently dangerous.
Is personal advantage the measure of right and wrong,
or the advantage of all affected: Humanists differ.
Is there truth in ethics? We differ. Are "right" and
"wrong" expressions of heart or head? Do people have
free wills? Do you measure morality by results or by
principles? Do people have duties as well as rights?
We have our differences on all these and more.!?
The debate rages on, and we can understand why: it takes a lot of thinking and discussion
to make up ethical systems independent of any reliable sources of revelation. In a remark-
able Time magazine article many years ago, Henry Grunwald made a stunning observation
about Secularists' efforts to do so: "We have gradually
dissolved-deconstructed-the human being into a
It takes a lot of thinking
and discussion to make
up ethical systems
independent of any
reliable sources of
revelation.
bundle of reflexes, impulses, neuroses, nerve endings.
The great religious heresy used to be making man the
measure of all things; but we have come close to making
man the measure of nothing"18
The idea that there is no absolute standard for ethics,
but that our ethical stance is relative to our culture or
to our individual situations, is called moral relativism.
Many Secularists protest the term relativism. Their views
Moral Relativism:
the belief that morality is
relative to, or defined by,
the individual or culture.
are much more nuanced than that, they say.19 In the in-
terest of accuracy, we will not call moral relativism the
ethical viewpoint of Secularism. Rather, we will describe
it as a thread of thought and action weaving through
the last four hundred or so years of philosophical con-
sideration. This is the case William Gairdner makes in The Book of Absolutes, pointing out
the seeds philosophers planted that yielded the impression that God's revelation cannot be
known or trusted, but that human reason and action can. Here's an overview:
• René Descartes (1596-1650): By saying "I think; therefore I am,, Descartes opened
the door to the idea that we are each capable of arriving at the truth on our own.
• Thomas Hobbes (1588-1679): The definition of good is "that which is the object of
any man's appetite."
• John Locke (1632-1704): To "know things" means to understand the relationships
between them rather than to discern absolute qualities.
• David Hume (1711-1776): Our ideas of cause and effect are based on habit rather
than certain knowledge.
• Immanuel Kant (1724-1804): Th; yol •way of knowing, outside of the mind, what
the phenomena we observe are actually like.
• Georg W. F. Hegel (1770-1831): Nothing stays the same-everything is evolving.
• John Stuart Mill (1806-1400D: We are free to act as we please as long as we do not
bring harm to others.
• Friedrich Nietzsche (1844-1900): Human action is guided by will, not by the false
promise of a perfect world of truth that is eternal.
• William James (1842-1910): There is no universal knowledge of truth; What is good
must be judged by its consequences.
• John Dewey (1859-1952): Even if there were absolute truths, we could not know them;
we should focus on improving the world in the here and now?!
As we stated earlier, Secularists disagree about particulars, but on these two points there
is no debate: when it comes to ethics, (1) God has nothing whatsoever to do with it, and
(2) were on our own. Herbert W. Schneider calls morality "an experimental art, saying it
is the "basic art of living well together. Moral right and wrong must therefore be conceived
in terms of moral standards generated in a particular society? Paul Kurtz said that "moral
principles should be treated as hypotheses, tested by their practical worth and judged by
what they cause to happen. 23
Situation ethics. The late Harvard professor Joseph Fletcher organized many Secularist
ethical teachings under the heading of situation ethics, which says that right and wrong are
determined by "the situations in which moral agents
have to decide for the most beneficial course open to
choice?"'4 By "beneficial" Fletcher meant choosing the
right course based on love. But how does this help if we
have no real standard by which to recognize what love
is? Based on his own understanding of love, Fletcher
Situation Ethics: the belief
that the morality of
an action is determined by
the unique situation
of that action.
justified abortion and euthanasia. In the end, Fletcher's
situation ethics became a prescription for doing whatever
each person thinks is best in any given situation. One early sex education advocate, Arthur
E. Gravatt, applied situation ethics this way: "The morality or immorality of any behavior
including sexual behavior, has been put in the context of 'situation ethics? In this approach
moral behavior may differ from situation to situation. Behavior might be moral for one person
and not another or moral at one time and not another.
Scientism. Secularists seem to view science as the primary guide for forming a workable
ethical outlook. Harry Elmer Barnes, one of America's preeminent twentieth-century his-
torians, believed that intelligent individuals would use
the scientific method to determine morals, so what they
conclude is by definition moral. "It should be absolutely
clear to any thoughtful and informed person,, wrote
Barnes, "that morality, far from being divorced from
intelligence, depends more thoroughly and completely
Scientism:
the philosophical belief
that reliable knowledge is
obtained solely through
the scientific method.
upon intelligence and scientific information than any
other phase of human thought"26
When the scientific method becomtul sis of a belief svstem, it can lead to the un-
warranted belief that scientific people are more intelligent and thus more moral; therefore we
can trust them to do what is right. Barnes was clear: "Wide variations in capacity appear to
be the most important single fan eat the human race. It would seem to follow that there


<!-- page-6 (book p.235) -->

will be certain kinds of conduct which will not be harmful for the abler members of society:
which, indeed, may be positively desirable and beneficial."27
There is no evidence that higher intelligence makes people more moral. While Barnes
wrote this in 1925, before the Marxist purges and the Nazi gas chambers, twentieth-century
history has taught clearly that scientism can take on a sinister character. And even when those
events did occur, Barnes labored to explain them away, making himself an embarrassment to
the academic community. By the end of his life, not even radical publishers would publish his
ideas. Barnes's life is a cautionary tale for those who put too much faith in science and reason.
In the last few decades, Secularists have retooled their ethical thinking. Much of it now
looks suspiciously familiar to anyone who understands the nature of Christian revelation.
Secular Humanist leader Paul Kurtz, for example, insisted that Secular Humanists accept the
Golden Rule and even the biblical injunction to "accept the aliens within our midst, respecting
their differences"' Secular Humanists, Kurtz said, "ought to tell the truth, keep promises,
be honest, sincere, beneficent, reliable, dependable, show fidelity, appreciation, gratitude, be
fair-minded, just, tolerant, should not steal, injure, maim or harm other persons."" Corliss
Lamont also tried to borrow Christian ethics while snubbing its foundation:
Any humane philosophy must include such New Testament ideals as the brotherhood
of man, peace on earth and the abundant life. There is much ethical wisdom, too, in
the Old Testament and its Ten Commandments. Without accepting any ethical prin-
ciple as a dogmatic dictum never to be questioned, the Humanist certainly adheres
in general to a Biblical commandment such as, "Thou shalt not bear false witness
against thy neighbor"30
Christians can applaud that biblical morality is being upheld, and it is to Kurtz's and Lam-
ont's credit that they knew a good idea when they saw one. What Secularists fail to address,
however, is why these values are worth defending as moral declarations. Cornelius van Tils
assessment is apt: they are sitting in God's lap in order to slap him in the face. In other words,
Secularists draw on truths explained only by God's existence and form them into arguments
to deny his existence altogether.
Ethical debates among Secularists reveal how difficult it is to abandon an absolute stan-
dard of morality and still arrive at a coherent philosoph. Without the absolute nature of
God, morality is set adrift. Will Durant admitted, "We shall find it no easy task to mold a
natural ethic strong enough to maintain moral restraint and social order without the sup-
port of supernatural consolations, hopes and fears*31 Francis Schaeffer added, "It is not just
difficult, it is impossible
4. MARXISM
Unlike Secularists. Marxists have no difficulty makino un their minds about ethics: ev
erything in the universe-including society-is in a state of constant change, moving society
upward toward the elimination of all social and economic class distinctions. The next social
advance in history will be the move from capitalism to socialism Marxists sav, which wil
inevitably change society's moral ideals. Anything promoting this advance is right. Anything
hindering it is wrong. This is called proletariat morality.
"It must be constantly borne in mind, said Howard
Selsam, "that Marx and Engels denied that moral ideals,
moral considerations, are central in human life and so-
cial evolution" Selsam would have been more accurate
to say that Marxists have moral ideals, but these ideals
change as circumstances change. As Marx wrote in The
Communist Manifesto, "Does it require deep intuition
to comprehend that man's ideas, views and conceptions,
Proletariat Morality:
the belief that whatever
advances the proletariat
and communism is morally
good, and whatever
hinders the proletariat
and communism is
morally evil.
in one word, man's consciousness, changes with every
change in the conditions of his material existence, in his
social relations and in his social life?"34 We are evolving; morality must evolve too.
For Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, "Thou shalt not steal" established a society in which
some had property and some did not; such an establishment was part of the "old morality"
the bourgeoisie (the owners) invented and used to oppress the property-less proletariat.
G. L. Andreyev, in What Kind of Morality Does Religion Teach?, stated, "In the reigning mo-
rality under capitalism that act is considered moral which promotes the preservation and
strengthening of the system of exploitation and the acquirement of profits. Religion merely
justifies this unjust and oppressive, bloody, and inhuman system in the name of God."3 To
the Marxist, everything capitalist is immoral; everything
done to oppose it, then, is moral by definition.
Marxists are grateful for any action that advances the
goal of a classless society and would call it ethical. The
ends justify the means. "Ethics, in short," said Selsam,
"is good only as anything else is good, for what it can
To the Marxist, everything
capitalist is immoral;
everything done
to oppose it, then,
is moral by definition.
accomplish, for the direction in which it takes men." To
Andreyev, the means of revolution was justified: "From
the point of view of communist morality the struggle against everything which hinders the
cause of communist construction is moral and humane and for this reason we consider the
strugle against the enemies of communism to be of a moral nature"
People who are bothered by revolution, according to Marxists, fail to understand history.
Evolution is mainful. It involves suffering and death. and there will be blood. Nature accu-
mulates the good and disposes of the bad. The struggle
moving us toward communism is like this. The fit must
survive. The unfit, along with their social institutions,
must perish.
The value of hatred is right and good in the Marxist
People who are bothered
by revolution, according
to Marxists, fail to
understand history.
ethical code as long as it is directed toward the property
owners, the bourgeoisie. Hatred is needed to fuel the
clash between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie To keep their followers in a perpetual
revolutionary mind-set, Marxist leaders, such as Mao Tse-tung, Joseph Stalin, Fidel Castro,
and Kim Jong-Eun, decades after their respective revolutions wound down, dressed in
military garb and peppered their speeches with revolutionary language. Marxism draws


<!-- page-7 (book p.237) -->

its inspiration from the hope of a more harmonious future but draws its energy from the
rehearsal of grievances against the bourgeoisie.
Here's a powerful example, and one many in today's culture will find surprising: One
Marxist who firmly believed in using any means to pursue proletariat morality was Ernesto
("Che") Guevara, Fidel Castro's right-hand man during the bloody Marxist revolution in
Cuba. Che's diary (which has subsequently been turned into a movie, The Motorcycle Diaries)
rationalized his radical change. Traveling across South America, Che witnessed firsthand
the plight of the lower class and in response gradually embraced an ends-justify-the-means
philosophy. The reality, according to columnist Paul Berman, was anything but:
The cult of Ernesto Che Guevara is an episode in the moral callousness of our time.
Che was a totalitarian. He achieved nothing but disaster.... Che presided over the Cuban
Revolution's first firing squads. He founded Cuba's "labor camp" system.... The pres-
ent-day cult of Che-the T-shirts, the bars, the posters-has succeeded in obscuring
this dreadful reality... He helped establish an unjust social system in Cuba and has
been erected into a symbol of social justice. He stood for the ancient rigidities of Lat-
in-American thought, in a Marxist-Leninist version, and he has been celebrated as a
free-thinker and a rebel"3
With evolution and dialectic as the building blocks of their moral philosophy, Marxists
feel free to abandon long-held moral standards in pursuit of a greater good—the creation of
a classless communist society. This may court disaster, but for the Marxist, all's well that ends
well; if true communism results, it will all be worth it. To paraphrase Vladimir Lenin, the
only morality that communists recognize is that which
furthers their interests.39
Doubtless most Marxists
begin well, with a desire
to shelter the poor against
injustice. This is a noble
concern, and righteous
people ought to share it.
But what means should be
employed in addressing it?
Doubtless most Marxists begin well, with a desire to
shelter the poor against injustice. This is a noble concern,
and righteous people ought to share it. But what means
should be employed in addressing it? The biblical view is
incarnation: enter into the brokenness of the oppressed.
Care personally. Walk alongside. Bring change through
the power of redemption. To those who reject God, the
afterlife, or the soul, though, this response is met with
impatience. Redemption is nice, but it is ambiguous and
frustratingly slow. Revolution is laser sharp and thrillingly fast. Some, such as liberation
theologians, hold out a genuine and heartfelt hope that we can have the best of both, but little
in Marxist ethical theory supports such a hope.
5. NEW SPIRITUALITY
New Spirituality says evervthing is consciousness, or what some people refer to as "god."
The good life consists in attaining higher consciousness. When each individual does this. life
will be better for all. Only one ethical absolute is possible to this way of thinking: complete
freedom to act in harmony with our own understanding of truth. "Free will," says Shirley
MacLaine, "is simply the enactment of the realization you are God, a realization that you are
divine: free will is making everything accessible to you?
To New Spiritualists, ethics is something that happens inside a person, not the result of
divine commands or societal expectations. As Marilyn Ferguson wrote, When people be
come autonomous, their values become internal. Internalized values allow us to seek higher
conscinusness, external limits block our abilitv to get in touch with inner truth. As Vera Alder
tells us, "We should search ourselves very carefully to see if we have any fixed ideas, any great
shyness or self-consciousness. If we have, we must seek freedom"* Take "Youshall not commit
adultery"4 for example. Shakti Gawain says, "If you're setting limits on your sexual energy, it
becomes distorted. If you believe it is something to be hidden, ignored, and controlled, then
you learn to hold back completely or act sexually only at certain safe moments**
Randall Baer, a former New Spiritualist who converted to Christianity, stated the basic
New Spiritualist credo: "Create your own reality according to what feels right for you."4s In
fact, to New Spiritualists, living any other way actually hurts us. According to Eckhart Tolle,
society's rules are based on ego—insisting that "we" are right and "they" are wrong.
"Being
right is identification with a mental position —a perspective, an opinion, a judgment, a story,"
he says. "For you to be right, of course, you need someone else to be wrong, and so the ego
loves to make wrong in order to be right."46
This does not mean there are no absolute truths, Tolle insists. Indeed, there is truth. But
thoughts and mental labels such as "right" and "wrong" cannot lead us to it: "The quicker you
are in attaching verbal or mental labels to things, people, or situations, the more shallow and
lifeless your reality becomes, and the more deadened you become to reality, the miracle of
life that continuously unfolds within and around you. In this way, cleverness may be gained,
but wisdom is lost, and so are joy, love, creativity, and aliveness?"
The truth, according to Tolle, cannot be found in "doctrines, ideologies, sets of rules, or
stories He continues, The Truth is inseparable from who you are. Yes, you are the Truth.
If you look for it elsewhere, you will be deceived every time?*
Not all New Spiritualists follow such an individual path. Those who take a more Bud-
dhist approach recognize that certain behaviors and attitudes cause suffering and diminish
happiness. The Dalai Lama, the spiritual leader of Buddhism, says,
By refraining from the ten nonvirtuous actions of killing, stealing, sexual misconduct,
lying, divisive speech, harsh speech, idle gossip, covetousness, malice, and wrong view,
we are restrained from causing others harm and from bringing about our own future
suffering. This prepares us for a fortunate future life. If we are reborn as an animal
we will have no opportunity to engage consciously in the practice of virtue. We must
therefore nurture the short-term goal of a good rebirth that enables us to continue
along our path toward the ultimate goal of Buddhahood.
Hinduism also identifies certain traits as obiestively wrong. In the Bhagavad Gita. Krishn
says to Arina. "Hypocrisv. insolence. anger, crueltv, ignorance. conceit-these, Arjuna, ar
the qualities of men with demonic traits.""! All of these traits are wrong, in the Hindu mind-
set, because they violate universal oneness and separate us from one another.
In the American context, though, New Spirituality seems irretrievably individualis-
tic, The key to ethics is asserting this autonomy and freedom. Ferguson admitted as much


<!-- page-8 (book p.239) -->

"Autonomous human beings can create and invent. And
New Spiritualists withhold
judgment about morality
because the truth is in
each of us.
they can change their minds, repudiating values they
once held"s The more we exercise this freedom, the
more we will lose our dogmatic attachment to a single
point of view"s And tolerance is the key: New Spiritu-
alists withhold judgment about morality because the
truth is in each of us. "Adam and Eve" says Marianne Williamson, "were happy until she
'ate of the knowledge of good and evil! What that means is that everything was perfect until
they began to judge-to keep their hearts open sometimes, but closed at others... Closing
our hearts destroys our peace. It's alien to our real nature?"54
Because morality is different for each person, whatever we decide to do is right-for
us. Shakti Gawain says, "I believe that every being chooses the life path and relationships
that will help him or her to grow the fastest One wonders what Gawain would say about
"history's horribles," such as Genghis Khan, Tomas de
Torquemada, and Adolf Hitler.
Karma: a concept found in
Eastern religions, karma
is the belief that good is
returned to those who do
good, and evil is returned
to those who do evil (either
in this life or the next.
Is there any accountability in New Spiritual ethics?
To a certain degree. The concept of karma says the con-
sequences of what we do for good or ill will eventually
be visited upon us. Shirley MacLaine defines karma this
way:
Whatever action one takes will ultimately return to
that person-good and bad-maybe not in this life
embodiment, but sometime in the future. And no one is exempt... For every act, for
every indifference, for every misuse of life, we are finally held accountable. And it is
up to us to understand what those accounts might be.56
However, if there is no standard by which to judge an act of "indifference" or a "misuse
of life" how can we really know if we are being indifferent or misusing life? How can we
distinguish the difference between cruelty and noncruelty? This is the karmic dilemma for
New Spiritualists: if karma is a knowable law, then absolute ethical standards exist, and we
are obligated to explain their source and obey them. Ethical relativism is false. If karmic
outcomes are unknowable, though, karma can never guide our actions because we can
never really know whether our actions are right or wrong.
New Spiritualists resolve this dilemma oddly: Since
This is the karmic
dilemma for New
Spiritualists: if karma
is a knowable law, then
absolute ethical standards
exist, and we are obligated
to explain their source and
obey them.
everything is one, they say, any difference we perceive
between good and evil and right and wrong is illusory.
As Marilyn Ferguson stated, "This wholeness unites op-
posites.... In these spiritual traditions there is neither
good nor evil. There is only light and the absence flight
... wholeness and brokenness ... flow and struggle.
Good and evil work together to move us toward
higher consciousness. David Spangler, one of the more
bold New Spiritualist writers, said this explicitly: "Christ
in the fLer... Lucifer prepares man for the experience of Christhood.
Lucifer works within each of us to bring us to wholeness as we move into the New Age"58
Evil isnt really evil, then, and good isn't really good.
As confusing as this seems, the New Spiritualist believes it all works out in the end. Using
a biblical example, Kevin Ryerson says,
Criminals and murderers sometimes come back around to be murdered themselves,
or perhaps to become a saint. For instance, Moses was a murderer... He beat the fel-
low to death out of rage, which was not exactly the most ethical decision. But he went
on to become a great intellect, a great law-giver, and is considered a saint by many
people. So basically, you get many chances. Your karma is your system of judgment.
There is justice.59
Morality, then, is nebulous. Establishing a system of ethics that works for everyone is
impossible. We might be able to discern what is right for ourselves, but we cannot know
whether others are doing what is right for them.
Ifthis seems incoherent, New Spiritualists say it is because you are not sufficiently oriented
to the flow of consciousness. You're too focused on how your thoughts will lead you to truth.
Stop thinking. Get in touch with your true self. As Captain Kirk said in one of the original
Star Trek episodes, "Sometimes a feeling is all we humans have to go on So are the laws
of logic just what we feel to be true? Is there ever a time when we should persuade others to
act differently? (And on what basis would we do this?) Is morality ever anything more than
an expression of a preference? Were Hitler and Stalin just expressing a different morality or
a wrong one? Is it possible for people to grow in moral understanding over time? Is there
ever any moral course of action we ought to pursue as humans, or are all moral beliefs just
expressions of cultural prejudice?61
6. POSTMODERNISM
Secularists and Marxists ground their ethics in atheism, materialism, and naturalism.
Postmodern ethics is a bit more enigmatic. Basically, postmodern ethics looks with suspicion
on both revelation and modern reason as sources of truth. The respected Polish sociologist
Zymunt Bauman frames the postmader view as follow. " suggest that the novelty of the
postmodern approach to ethics consists first and foremost in ... the rejection of the typi-
cally modern ways of going about its moral problems (that is ... the philosophical search for
absolutes, universals and foundations in theorv)"62 The British essayist Adam Phillips states
bluntly, "Universal moral principles must be eradicated and reverence for individual and
cultural uniqueness inculcated."63
The rejection of both revelation and reason is evident in the writings of the philoso-
pher Richard Rortv. In Achieving Our Country, Rorty questioned God's place in the moral
scheme of the universe Referring to Walt Whitman's statement "And I call to mankind, Be
not curious about God. / For I who am curious ahout each am not curious about God,"
Whitman thought there was no need to be curious about God because there is ni
standard, not even a divine one, against which the decisions of a free people can be


<!-- page-9 (book p.241) -->

measured. Americans. [Whitman] hoped, would spend the energy that past human
societies had spent on discovering God's desires on discovering one another's desires 65
After denving God's existence (or at least relevance). Rortv moved on to deny the existence
of any universal moral reality "to which our moral judgments might hope to correspond, as
our physical science supposedly corresponds to physical reality 66
So if neither revelation nor reason can act as guides, what can? To Postmodernist Jean-
François Lyotard, the answer was right action. But what constitutes right action? Lyotard,
for his part, was content to live with "little narratives." If philosophical truth (what we can
know about reality) resides in the local community, it follows that moral truth how we
should behave) resides in the same community This
was Lyotard's way of expressing cultural relativism, the
Cultural Relativism:
the belief that truth and
morals are relative to
one's community.
belief that truth and morals are relative to one's culture.
Postmodernists often hesitate to use the term cul-
tural relativism or relativism. Rorty, for example, tried
to soften the word relative. He commented,
This view is often referred to as "cultural relativism." But it is not relativistic, if that
means saying that every moral view is as good as every other. Our moral view is, I
firmly believe, much better than any competing view, even though there are a lot of
people whom you will never be able to convert to it. It is one thing to say, falsely, that
there is nothing to choose between us and the Nazis. It is another thing to say, correctly,
that there is no neutral, common ground to argue our differences. That Nazi and I
will always strike one another as begging all the crucial questions, arguing in circles 68
While there is no objective basis for determining what is right, Rorty insisted, his view was
right when compared with, say, Nazi morality. But while making this claim, he also admitted
there is no way to judge between the two views. Obviously not all Postmodernists agree with
this. In fact, some would express serious disagreement.
But we'll let Rorty's books speak for themselves.
Postmodernists say
each community places
moral standards on its
members' actions. Every
culture has its own set
of moral standards and
these standards evolve
according to the dictates
of the group.
In the final analysis, Postmodernists say, each com-
munity places moral standards on its members actions.
Every culture has its own set of moral standards, and these
standards evolve according to the dictates of the group.®
Abortion, for example, used to be viewed with revulsion
and horror. Now it is widelv accepted as distasteful but
necessary. The narrative has changed; what we consider
to be "real" now is different from before.
But why do Postmodernists like Rorty speak and
write about moral issues if morality does not actually
exist independent of our minds? Rorty's revised pragmatism works backed. Christian
ethics would say, "Here's what God is like, so this is how we must act" but Rorty would say,
"Here's how we think we should act based on our formative storv, so let's now develop a theory
to accommodate it." The result is an ethical stance saying that somebody's rights are based
on the fact that they were once wronged. You were once oppressed, or part of an oppressed
you judge to have been your oppressors.
group? Let's build a theory of ethics in order to privilege you at the expense of those whom
This reverse thinking about ethics is why Rorty considered words as merely tools of
persuasion-_he believed he could use words to move people who live in certain ways to see
the world as he wanted it to be and then do what he wanted them to do.?*
Not all Postmodernists agree with Rorty's willingness to tell people what to do. Post-
modern psychiatrist Adam Phillips sees any ethical boundary as "a form of pontification
and imperial self-aggrandizement... No adult can know what's best for another adult; and,
by the same token, no group or society can know what's best for another group or society!?!
phillips's stance seems more in keeping with the overall postmodern mind-set, which does
not allow anyone to be "right" on any particular issue, including ethics.
7. ISLAM
"There is no division of ethics and law in Islam," says the Swedish Muslim writer S. Parvez.
Manzoor? Muslims believe Islamic law is ethical by definition, and what is ethical ought to
be enshrined in every nation's laws. Because of this connection between Islamic ethics and
law, we suggest you revisit the present section again after reading the "Law" chapter.
Historically, Muslims derive their ethics from the Quran and the Hadith. The Quran
contains many ethical commands. The Hadith presents
Muhammad as the exemplary human whom Muslims
must imitate in all respects. "Muhammad was only a
mortal being commissioned by God to teach the word
of God and lead an exemplary life," wrote Islamic scholar
Divine Command Theory:
the belief that right and
wrong are determined
by God's commands.
Hammudah Abdalati. "He stands in history as the best
model for man in piety and perfection. He is a living
proof of what man can be and of what he can accomplish in the realm of excellence and vir-
tue "73 Recause ethics is based on specific commands revealed from God, we could summarize
Islamic ethics as divine command theory.
Ram Swarup, the late Hindu thinker and author, articulated how Muslims perceive the
actions and judgment of Muhammad recorded in the Hadith:
The Prophet is caught as it were in the ordinary acts of his life-sleeping, eating,
mating, praying, hating, dispensing justice, planning expeditions and revenge against
his enemies. The picture that emerges is hardly flattering, and one is left wondering
why in the first instance it was reported at all and whether it was done by admirers
or enemies. One is also left to wonder how the believers, generation after generation,
could have found this story so inspiring.
The answer is that the [Muslim) believer are conditioned to look at the whole thine
through the eyes of faith. An infidel in his fundamental misguidance may find the
Prophet rather sensual and cruel and certainly many of the things he did do not
conform to ordinary ideas of morality but the believers look at the whole thing dit-
ferently. To thom morality derives from the Dronhet's action. the moral is whatever
he did. Morality does not determine the Prophet's actions, but his actions determine


<!-- page-10 (book p.243) -->

and define morality. Muhammad's acts were not ordinary acts; they were Allah's own
acts [i.e., acts empowered, guided and approved by Allah].
It was in this way and by this logic that Muhammad's opinions became the dogmas of
Islam and his personal habits and idiosyncrasies became moral imperatives: Allah's
commands for all believers in all ages and climes to follow.?4
We might envision Muslims wearing a bracelet stamped with WWMD-What would
Muhammad do? This is the only genuinely relevant ethical question in Islam.
Why is what Muhammad did so important? Because unlike the Bible, in which God
reveals what he is like and what he wants us to do, the Quran presents the God of Islam as
not directly knowable. If God's character cannot be known, we must content ourselves with
God's decrees, which are most fully revealed in Muhammad. What Muhammad says goes.
Abdalati summarized what we can know about God and ethics through the revelation
given to Muhammad:
The concept of morality in Islam centers around certain basic beliefs and principles.
Among these are the following: (1) God is the Creator and Source of all goodness, truth,
and beauty. (2) Man is a responsible, dignified, and honorable agent of his Creator. (3)
God has put everything in the heavens and the earth in the service of mankind. (4)
By His Mercy and Wisdom, God does not expect the impossible from man or hold
him accountable for anything beyond his power. Nor does God forbid man to enjoy
the good things of life. (5) Moderation, practicality, and balance are the guarantees of
high integrity and sound morality. (6) All things are permissible in principle except
what is singled out as obligatory, which must be observed, and what is singled out as
forbidden, which must be avoided. (7) Man's ultimate responsibility is to God and his
highest goal is the pleasure of his Creator?
Required actions include the five pillars of Islam discussed in the "Islam" chapter. Ethical
prohibitions include drinking wine (Quran 2:219; 4:43; 5:93-94; some Muslims apply this
prohibition by analogy to all alcoholic beverages and intoxicating drugs); eating pork; animals
who kill with claws, teeth, or fangs; birds of prey; rodents; reptiles; worms; and dead animals
(Quran 2:172-73; 5:4-6); eating meat that has not been properly slaughtered (proper slaughter
includes a prayer to Allah at the time of the slaughter); and gambling (Quran 2:219). Jihadis
may also include as permissible tagiyya (concealment-lying for the sake of Allah to advance
Islam's cause), marriage to multiple wives, and slavery.
Muslims are motivated toward ethical behavior from a desire to develop personal virtue
and spirituality, to better the state of others, to strengthen relationships, and to anticipate
the coming judgment. At the final judgment, all humans will have their deeds weighed in
the balance. The Quran says, Then those whose balance (of good deeds) is heavy, they wi
attain salvation: But those whose balance is light, will be those who have lost their souls, 1
Hell will they abide" (23:102-3). According to Hammudah Abdalati,
This world will come to an end someday, and the dead will rise to stand for their final
and fair trial. Everything we do in this world, every intention we have, every move we
make, every thought we entertain, and every word we say, all are counted and kept
in accurate records. On the Day of Judgment they will be brought up. People with
good records will be generously rewarded and warmly welcomed to the Heaven of
God, and those with bad records will be punished and cast into Hil... However, the
Muslim believes that there definitely will be compensation and reward for the good
deeds, and punishment for the evil ones. That is the Day of justice and final settlement
of all accounts.?
Fear of an eternity in hell is a strong motivation for Muslims, especially since one cannot
know with certainly what God requires of human souls.
At the end of the day, i's straightforward what constitutes ethical behavior for Muslims.
Philosophical debates are rare. Standards do not change based on economic conditions. No
amount of meditation will move us to higher consciousness. Whether you believe in your
heart isn't as important as whether you do your duty. Perhaps, in a world of complexity and
chaos, it is this straightforwardness that makes Islam attractive to so many.
8. CHRISTIANITY
Christians say God is not merely a divine rule maker or the keeper of the good; he has
made us in his image to be stewards of the earth. But because we are fallen, we live with the
dissonance between the way things are and the way they ought to be. Fortunately, though,
this is not the end of the story: through Christ we gain a means of acting as God desires as
well as a desire to act accordingly. Ethics, then, is not the exercise of our own wills but the
discovery of a God who wills all and has exercised himself on our behalf.
The basis of Christian ethics is found in Jesus's instruction to love God with all our heart,
soul, mind, and strength and to love our neighbor as ourselves (Luke 10:27)." This kind of
love is derived from a peculiar Greek word, agape (pronounced "ah-gah-PAY").
Just as the law of gravity is apparent to anyone who
jumps out of an upper-story window, the Christian worl-
dview says that what is morally true can be seen by all
whose ability to perceive is not completely distorted.
Ethics is simply an expansion of a generally revealed
moral order.
Agape: the belief that
morality is built upon
two foundational moral
absolutes: love of God
and love of neighbor.
The idea of a moral law is not popular. Those who
wish it not to exist, or who disagree about its nature, are
Snoring the truth. Too often the response to the Christian claim is to attack the messenger
rather than refute the message. For example, Simon Blackburn, a Cambridge professor and
leader in the British Humanist Association, warns against permitting Christian involvement
in the public sphere by saying, "The only reason Christians are not still burning each other
is because the secular state stopped them?
It is true that many evil things have been done in the name of Christ. So-called Christians
have blatantly acted contrarv to Christ's message. Christianity even predicts this: because of sin,
people will do evil and often do it under the banner of goodness. In service of truth, they will
lie. In the name of compassion, they will torture. To blame God's revelation for this, though,
s to confuse the disease with the diagnosis, as one who blames the doctor for having caused
the sickness he identifies, or blaming the composer when an unprepared student botches the
pertormance of his music. When a cook ruins dinner, it might be a flaw in the recipe, but


<!-- page-11 (book p.245) -->

more often it is caused by mixing the wrong ingredients in the wrong order or baking them
at the wrong temperature or for the wrong amount of time. To quote Robert Burns's famous
poem "To a Mouse, "The best-laid schemes of mice and men oft go awry."
Muslims believe moral norms are the products of God's decree: Marxists and Seculars
rely almost exclusively on their economic or naturalistic philosophy to determine ethics;
Postmodernists argue for a morality based on shared "community" values; and New Spir-
itualists see ethical behavior as following individually determined inner truth, Christians
see moral norms as proceeding from God's nature or character. Francis Schaeffer explained
Christianity's uniqueness in this regard:
One of the distinctions of the Judeo-Christian God is that not all things are the same to
Him. That at first may sound rather trivial, but in reality it is one of the most profound
things one can say about the Judeo-Christian God. He exists; He has a character; and
not all things are the same to Him. Some things conform to His character, and some
are opposed to His character?
The task of Christian ethics, then, is to determine what conforms to God's character and
what does not.
Seeing right and wrong as objectively absolute based on the nature and character of
a personal, loving God is superior to any concept of moral relativism. Further, Christians
understand human beings as free moral agents, as morally culpable, capable of observing
God's character and responding—or not responding-
Christians understand
human beings as free
moral agents, as morally
culpable, capable of
observing God's character
and responding-
or not responding-
in accordance with
God's character.
in accordance with God's character. Acclaimed French
philosopher Luc Ferry says the Christian doctrine of
free will —that we have all been given natural gifts, and
how we use them makes them good or bad— has rev-
olutionized the history of thought."80
To Jürgen Habermas, one of the world's top philos-
ophers, the Judeo-Christian worldview has produced an
ethic incomparable in the history of the world:
Egalitarian universalism, from which sprang the ideas
of freedom and social solidarity, of an autonomous
conduct of life and emancipation, of the individual morality of conscience, human
rights and democracy, is the direct heir of the Judaic ethic of justice and the Christian
ethic of love. This legacy, substantially unchanged, has been the object of continual
critical appropriation and reinterpretation. To this day, there is no alternative to it.
And in light of the current challenges of a postnational constellation, we continue to
draw on the substance of this heritage. Everything else is just idle postmodern talk. 1
With some of the world's top philosophers pointing out its virtues, the ethical stance of
Christianity is not easily intimidated. At root, though, Christianity's ethics are not compli
cated: "So whatever you wish that others would do to you, do also to them, for this is the
Law and the Prophets" (Matt 7:12) and "Let love be genuine Abhor what is evil. hold fast
to what is good" (Rom. 12:9).
Where according to Christianity, do moral absolutes come from? To say that a particular
moral statement can be objectively known is to say that to not know it is to commit an error.
And to say that this is the case across all times and cultures is to say that the particular moral
statement__ such as "one ought never torture babies for fun" —ought to be universally known.
The Rille does not specify these commands line by line. Rather, it gives clear guidelines for
moral decision making so we can figure out what is right in the circumstances we face. The
most obvious ethical principles, of course, are found in the Decalogue (the Ten Command-
to describing God's moral order. For example, the New Testament books of Romans and
ments) 32 which establish the basic moral law for humanity. Much of Scripture is dedicated
Galatians contain a number of moral directives for us to follow.
The Bible also introduces us to God incarnate, Jesus Christ, and describes his ministry
andethical teachings in an understandable way. The apex of Christ's ethical teaching is found
in the Sermon on the Mount (Matt. 5-7) in which his audience realized that he was the role
model for virtuous living. Irish historian and political theorist W. E. H. Lecky, who never
claimed to be a Christian, admitted, "The character of Jesus has not only been the highest
pattern of virtue, but the strongest incentive to its practice"*3
In fact, the call to follow Jesus is the simplest summation of Christian ethics and at the
same time the most difficult thing to do. Dietrich Bonhoeffer, a Christian who died for his
faith at the hands of the Nazis during World War II, noted, "On two separate occasions Peter
received the call, 'Follow me. It was the first and last word Jesus spoke to his disciple (Mark
1:17, John 21:22) '84 Christ asks but one thing of all Christians: "Follow me!" (Luke 9:23), 5
By following Christ we experience how to focus on God's glory. William Young wrote, "In
declaring by word and deed the perfections, especially
the moral perfections of the Most High, man finds true
happiness"86
Carl F. H. Henry described the heart and soul of
By following Christ we
experience how to focus
on God's glory.
Christian ethics: "Hebrew-Christian ethics unequivo-
caly defines moral obligation as man's duty to God"3?
But the use of duty in this sense means much more than checking obedience boxes on some
cosmic list. When Jesus said, "You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart and with
all your soul and with all your strength and with all your mind, and your neighbor as your-
self" (Luke 10:27), he was quoting the Torah, the Old
Testament law, reemphasizing what God had always set
down as the proper view of ethics.
The first part of Jesus's command —love God-shows
Only seeking to reflect
God's character leads
to true flourishing.
the insufficiency of deontological (duty-based) theories
ofethics. The goal is not merely to perform a duty but to
love God with every aspect of our being: heart, soul, mind. and strength. Christianity involves
a relationship with a person, not merely a religious responsibility. As for teleological (conse
quence-based) theories of ethics. we cannot sufficiently fulfill our ethical responsibilities by
acting in our own best interests. Only ceeking to reflect God's character leads to true flourishing.
The second part of Tesus's command applies loving God to loving our neighbor as we love
ourselves. There is little room here for a self-definition of human flourishing or personal good


<!-- page-12 (book p.247) -->

since, at its most basic level loving God means serving others. Carl Henry summarized this
teaching:
The Apostle John appeals to the explicit teaching of the Redeemer to show the insep-
arable connection between love of God and love of neighbor: "If a man says, I love
God, and hateth his brother, he is a liar: for he that loveth not his brother whom he
hath seen, how can he love God whom he hath not seen? And this commandment
have we from him, that he who loveth God love his brother also" (1 John 4:20f). "God
is love, and he that dwelleth in love dwelleth in God, and God in him" (4:16). The love
of God is the service of man in love.
Jesus said in Mark 10:43-45, "Whoever would be great among you must be your servant,
and whoever would be first among you must be slave of all. For even the Son of Man came
not to be served but to serve, and to give his life as a ransom for many?" This ethical stance
of servanthood is more than just serving the spiritual needs of others. As Norm Geisler ar-
ticulates it, it has to do with serving physical needs as well:
Man is more than a soul destined for another world; he is also a body living in this
world. And as a resident of this time-space continuum man has physical and social
needs which cannot be isolated from spiritual needs. Hence, in order to love man as
he is-the whole man—one must exercise a concern about his social needs as well as
his spiritual needs.
As Christians, our faith in God does not exempt us from worldly concerns, such as feed-
ing the hungry or caring for the sick. Jesus tells us in Matthew 25:31-46 that when we serve
others, we serve him, and when we fail to serve others,
we fail to serve him.
As Christians, our faith
in God does not exempt
us from worldly concerns,
such as feeding the hungry
or caring for the sick.
These ethical guidelines go beyond what we could
think up on our own. "The human mind," said C.S.
Lewis, "has no more power of inventing a new value
than of imagining a new primary color, or, indeed, of
creating a new sun and a new sky for it to move in."?! For
the Christian, the moral order is as real as the physical
order-some would say even more real. The apostle Paul said the physical order is tempo-
rary, but the order "not seen" is eternal (2 Cor. 4:18) 2 This eternal moral order reflects the
character and nature of God himself.
9. THE CHRISTIAN RESPONSE TO RELATIVISTIC MORAL SYSTEMS
The greatest challenge to Christian ethics, in our judgment, comes from the ethical stance
Secularism, Marxism. and Postmodernism promote. If only the natural world may be taken
into account, then what is unique-and uniquely beneficial-about Christian ethics must be
set aside. No ethical standards can be known to be absolute. Christians should think long and
hard before granting this premise. As Francis Schaeffer insisted, there must be an absolute
if there is to be any kind of meaningful moral order «if there is no absolute bevond man's
ideas, then there is no final appeal to judge between individuals and groups whose moral
indements conflict. We are merely left with conflicting
opinions"': The practical Achilles heel of relativism is
this: ifall we have are conflicting opinions and subjective
value judgments, the most powerful will always win,
regardless of their rightness. "Those who stand outside
all judgments of value cannot have any ground for pre-
ferring one of their own impulses to another except the
emotional strength of that impulse," wrote C. S. Lewis 94
The practical Achilles' heel
of relativism is this: if all
we have are conflicting
opinions and subjective
value judgments,
the most powerful will
always win, regardless
of their rightness.
Interestingly, there is some movement even among
those of a naturalistic persuasion to extend beyond purely
individualistic, personal-autonomy-driven ethical views. In The Righteous Mind, Jonathan
Haidt, an atheistic naturalist, describes how his graduate work and several cross-cultural
experiences led him to see the inadequacy of the Western idea of a person as an autonomous,
individual self. Such a view, says Haidt, makes it difficult to make moral decisions and,
importantly, to understand how people around the world make such decisions. In response,
Haidt examined moral psychologist Richard Shweder's research and found that autonomy is
only one reasonable basis for moral decision making. Community and divinity are also valid.
Rather than always starting with the individual, we need to take into account the rela-
tionship between people and God's will as legitimate starting points for moral understanding.
The idea of the individual as a self-contained, autonomous unit is, according to Charles
Taylor's massive and acclaimed text A Secular Age, a relatively recent phenomenon. It is only
in the past five hundred years or so that people have gotten the sense of a "self" that is "buft-
ered - that a clear boundary exists between self and others. In previous times in the West,
and in other nations around the world today, the boundary between the self and other people
is porous— we affect one another more than we admit, for good or for ill Descartess idea of
"I think therefore I am" is insufficient not just because it
is philosophically difficult to sustain but because it begins
with "T" rather than with "we" or with "God."
Understanding our obligation to God is the only
thing that gets us past relativism. We realize God is
truth; therefore, it is always unlawful and morally wrong
for a judge to take a bribe. We understand God is lov-
ing; therefore, it is universally wrong for an adult to
sexually abuse a child. If ethical standards are relative
to a particular culture, the best we can say is, "It is un-
lawful. in the present circumstances, to take a bribe or
If ethical standards are
relative to a particular
culture, the best we can
say is, "It is unlawful, in
the present circumstances,
to take a bribe or abuse
a child." But strict
adherence to the law does
not fulfill the full duty
of the ethical life.
abuse a child." But strict adherence to the law does not
fulfil the full duty of the ethical life. Corporations may
comply with the law and still act hurtfully. Governments may act within the proper statutes
and codes and still afflict the vulnerable "We should never forget" Martin Luther King Jr.
wrote in his letter from the Birmingham jail, "that everything Adolf Hitler did in Germany
was legal' and everything the Hungarian freedom fighters did in Hungary was 'illegal."
Cultural relativism savs what is right and wrong depends on the culture. But if this is so,


<!-- page-13 (book p.249) -->

culture is absolute, and those who seek tat keepsige it—as did William Wilbertorce in seeking
to abolish slavery—at best have no grounds for doing so, and at worst are in the wrong fo
imposing their views on others.
What appear to be exceptions to an visions (Newrule, such as permission to kill an intruder
to protect one's tamily or to lie in order to help deteat an evil enemy, do not invalidate the
rule but prove it. When we see a wrong done, we know it is not as it ought to be. That sense
of "oughtness" tells us something of God's law having been placed in our hearts.
In conclusion, the Christian ethical system is both like and unlike any other system ever
postulated. We must decide now how we will act in response. Dietrich Bonhoeffer asked,
Who stands fast? Only the man whose final standard is not his reason, his principles,
his conscience, his freedom, or his virtue, but who is ready to sacrifice all this when
he is called to obedient and responsible action in faith and in exclusive allegiance to
God-the responsible man, who tries to make his whole life an answer to the question
and call of God. Where are these responsible people??
Those willing to raise their hands in response to Bonhoeffer's question ought to be pre-
pared to treat God's moral order with the same respect they show his physical order, to love
God with all they are and have, and to treat others as they desire to be treated. Such people
must be prepared for a mission to everywhere: to stand firm against tyranny and slavery in
the halls of government as well as sacrifice for the sake of the gospel on the mission field.
It is not the extraordinary Christians who do this but the quite ordinary ones. In putting
Christian ethics into practice, believers demonstrate to a watching world that Christ's truth
is worth believing and living.®
We have now invested three chapters studying the disciplines of theology, philosophy,
and ethics, describing God as creator, redeemer, and sustainer; discussing what is real and
how we know; and outlining what the good life consists of. In the next chapter we will seek
to answer two questions that to many people are even more basic: what is life and where did
it come from? These two questions are in the domain of biology, the study of life. And as we
will shortly see, biology is much more than dissections and memorization of terms. It is in
the domain of biology that many of the big worldview battles of our day are being fought.
ENDNOTES
1. Victor Hugo, Les Miserables, trans. Lee Fahnestock and Norman MacAfee (New York: Signet Classic, 1987), 103-6,
2. Walter Lippman, Public Opinion (New York: Free Press, 1965), 80, quoted in Thomas Sowell, A Conflict of Visions Nev
York: William Morrow, 1987), 18.
3. Quoted in Carl F. H. Henry, ed., Baker's Dictionary of Christian Ethics (Grand Rapids: Baker, 1973), 620.
4. John Deigh, Introduction to Ethics (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2010), 8.
5. Simon Blackburn, Ethics: A Very Short Introduction (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2001), 4.
6. Deigh, Introduction to Ethics, 14.
7. Austin Dacey, The Secular Conscience (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2008), 170-71.
8. Quoted in Dacey, Secular Conscience, 3l.
9. Blackburn, Ethics, 114.
10. Quoted in Morris B. Storer, ed., Humanist Ethics (Buffalo, NY: Prometheus Books, 1980), 137.
1l. Ella Wheeler Wilcox, "No Classes!" in Poems of Pleasure (New York: Belford, 1888), 115.
12. Blackburn, Ethics, 116.
13. Jean-Paul Sartre, Existentialism and Human Emotions (New York: Citadel, 1957), 22.
Macmillan, 2004), 230.
14. Richard Weikart, From Darwin to Hitler: Evolutionary Ethics, Lugenics, and kacism in Germany (New York: Palgrave
15. Paul Kurtz, ed. The Humanist Alternative (Buffalo, NY: Prometheus Books, 1973), 50.
16. See Exodus 20:1-17.
17. Storer, Humanist Ethics, 3.
18. Henry Grunwald, "The Year 2000," Time, March 30, 1992, 50-51.
19. Austin Dacey, a moral philosopher and Secularist leader, said in a New ork Times editorial, "Perhaps a futur
encyclical will concentrate on the truly harmful kind of relativism. This is the misguided multiculturalism that keep
Wester liberals from criticizing the oppression of women, religious minorities and apostates in Islamic societies for
fear of being accused of Islamophobia. In such cases we should not shrink from the ideals of autonomy and equality
but firm them openly for what they are: objectively defensible principles of conscience. Austin Dacey, "Believing
in Doubt, New York Times, February 3, 2006, http://www.nytimes.com/2006/02/03/opinion/03dacey.html? =0.
20. William D. Gairdner, The Book of Absolutes (Montreal: McGill-Queen's University Press, 2010).
21. Paraphrased and adapted from Gairdner, Book of Absolutes, 9-18.
22. Quoted in Storer, Humanist Ethics, 99-100.
23. Kurtz, Humanist Alternative, 55.
24. Joseph Fletcher, "Humanist Ethics: The Groundwork," quoted in Storer, Humanist Ethics, 255.
25. Arthur E. Gravatt, quoted in William H. Genne, "Our Moral Responsibility;" Journal of the American College Health
Association 15 (May 1967): 63.
26. Harry Elmer Barnes, The New History and the Social Studies (New York: Century, 1925), 543.
27. Barnes, New History, 539.
28. Paul Kurtz, Humanist Manifesto 2000: A Call for a New Planetary Humanism (Amherst, NY: Prometheus, 2000), 32.
29. Kurtz, Humanist Manifesto 2000.
30. Corliss Lamont, A Lifetime of Dissent (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1988), 55.
31. Quoted in Francis A. Schaeffer, The Complete Works of Francis A. Schaeffer: A Christian View of the West, 5 vols.
(Westchester, IL: Crossway Books, 1982), 5:439.
32. Schaeffer, Complete Works of Francis A. Schaeffer.
33. Quoted in V. I. Lenin, Collected Works, 45 vols. (Moscow: Progress Publishers, 1982), 31:291.
34. Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Collected Works, 40 vols. (New York: International Publishers, 1977), 6:503.
35. G. L. Andreyev, What Kind of Morality Does Religion Teach? (Moscow: [publisher unknown], 1959), quoted in Raymond
S. Sleeper, A Lexicon of Marxist-Leninist Semantics (Alexandria, VA: Western Goals, 1983), 174.
36. Howard Selsam, Socialism and Ethic (New York: International Publishers, 1943), 98.
37. Sleeper, Lexicon, 175.
38. Paul Berman, "The Cult of Che: Don't Applaud The Motorcycle Diaries," Slate, September 24, 2004, http://www
sSlate.com/id/2107100/. See also Humberto Fontova, The Longest Romance: The Mainstream Media and Fidel Castro (New
York: Encounter, 2013).
39. Ronald Reagan's recognition of this point was a key motivator in his stand against communism. See Paul Kengor,
The Crusader: Ronald Reagan and the Fall of Communism (New York: Harper Perennial, 2007), 174.
40. Quoted in William Goldstein, "Life on the Astral Plane," Publishers Weekly, March 18, 1983, 46.
41. Marilyn Ferguson, The Aquarian Conspiracy (Los Angeles: J. P. Tarcher, 1980), 327.
42. Vera Alder, When Humanity Comes of Age (New York: Samuel Weiser, 1974), 48-49.
43. Exodus 20:14.
14. Shakti Cawain, Living in the Light (San Rafael, CA: New World Library, 1986), 128.
45, Randall N. Baer, Inside the New Age Nightmare (Lafayette, LA: Huntington House, 1989, 88.
46. Eckhart Tolle, A New Earth (New York: Plume, 2005), 67.
47. Tolle, New Earth, 26-27.
48. Tolle, New Earth, 70.
49. Tolle, New Earth, 71.
50. The Dalai Lama, A Profound Mind (New York: Three Rivers, 2011, 138.
5. Stephen Mitchell, trans., tadenvad Gita (New York: Three Rivers, 2000),
52. Ferguson, Aquarian Conspiracy, 331.
53. Ferguson, Aquarian Conspiracy, 192.
54. Marianne Williamson, A Return to Love: Reflections on the Principles of "A Course in Miracles" (New York: HarperCollin
55. Gawain, Living in the Light, 60.
30. Shirley Maclaine, Out on a Limb (Toronto: Bantam Books, 1984), 96, IIl
57. Ferguson, Aquarian Conspiracy, 381.


<!-- page-14 -->

58. David Spangler, Reflections of the Christ (Forres, Scotland: Findhorn, 1977), 40-44.
59. Kevin Ryerson, Spirit Communication: The Soul's Path (New York: Bantam Books, 1989), 84.
60. "A Taste of Armageddon," Star Trek, originally aired February 23, 1967.
1. These questions form a list of arguments against what ethicist Scott Rae refers to as subiectivism, the notion that
moral statements cannot be known to be objectively true. For more information see chapter 2, "'s There a Moral
Law That We Can Know? in Scott Rae, Doing the Right Thing (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 2013). Rae's arguments are,
in summary, (1) the laws of logic actually exist beyond personal preference, (2) nearly everyone practices moral
persuasion —even those who claim that obiective truth cannot be known; (3) moralitv is more than an expression se
a preference-some moral reasoning can be known to be wrong; (4) people can grow in moral understanding over
time, which demonstrates that there are objective standards of morality to which we can aspire; and (5) humans
have an innate sense of "oughtness" that shows that we understand objectively what morality is, and that it is not
merely an expression of cultural prejudice.
62. Zygmunt Bauman, Postmodern Ethics (Oxford, UK: Blackwell, 1993), 3-4.
63. Quoted in Algis Valiunas, "Mental Health," Weekly Standard 11, no. 9 (November 14, 2005): 41.
64. Walt Whitman, "Leaves of Grass," in Selected Poems: 1855-1892, ed. Gary Schmidgall (New York: St. Martin's Griffin,
1999), 63.
65. Richard Rorty, Achieving Our Country: Leftist Thought in Twentieth-Century America (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 1998), 16.
66. Robert B. Brandom, ed., Rorty and His Critics (Oxford, UK: Blackwell, 2001), 4-5.
67. Kevin J. Vanhoozer, Postmodern Theology (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2005), 10.
68. Richard Rorty, Philosophy and Social Hope (New York: Penguin Books, 1999), 15.
69. This concept of morality is explored in the essay "Ethics without Principles," quoted in Rorty, Philosophy and Social
Hope, 72-88.
70. A theme throughout Rorty's Philosophy and Social Hope is the use of words, ideas, and philosophies as tools rather
than true things, especially in chapters 22-26.
71. Quoted in Valiunas, "Mental Health," 41.
72. S. Parvez Manzoor, "Shari'ah: The Ethics of Action," in "Islamic Conceptual Framework," MUNA, accessed February
15, 2016, www.muslimummah.org/articles/articles.php?itemno=200&&category-Islam
73. Hammudah Abdalati, Islam in Focus (Indianapolis: Amana, 1978), 8.
74. Ram Swarup, Understanding Islam through Hadis (Delhi, India: Voice of India, 1983), xv-xvi, quoted in George W.
Braswell, Islam: Its Prophet, Peoples, Politics, and Power (Nashville: Broadman and Holman, 1996), 83.
75. Abdalati, Islam in Focus, 40. The Bible grounds morality in God's essential character; the Quran teaches that God
cannot ultimately be known.
76. Abdalati, Islam in Focus, 13.
77. Luke 10:27: "Jesus] answered, You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul and
with all your strength and with all your mind, and your neighbor as yourself."
78. Simon Blackburn, "Against the Grain," Independent, May 4, 2007, in "Professor Simon Blackburn," British Humanist
Association,
accessed March 19,
professor-simon-blackburn/.
2014, http://humanism.org.uk/about/our-people/distinguished-supporters
79. Francis Schaeffer, "Christian Faith and Human Rights, Simon Greenleaf Law Reviet 2(1982/83): 5, quoted in John
Montgomery, Human Rights and Human Dignity (Dallas: Probe Books, 1986), 113.
80. Luc Ferry, A Brief History of Thought, trans. Theo Cuffe (New York: Harper Perennial, 2011), 74.
81. Jürgen Habermas, Time of Transitions (Cambridge, UK: Polity, 2006), 151.
82. See Exodus 20:1-17.
83. W. E. H. Lecky, History of European Morals (from Augustus to Cition that le), 2 vols. (New York: George Braziller, 1955),
84. Quoted in Norman L. Geister, Ethics: Alternatives and Issues (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1979), 156.
85. Luke 9.22. "Nesus said to all If anvone would come after me, let him deny himcelf and take up his cross daily
86. Quoted in Baker Dictionary of Christian Ethics, 432-33.
87. Carl F. H. Henry, Christian Personal Ethics (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1957), 209.
56. Leviticus 19:18: "You shall not take vengeance or bear a is cross dailyt the sons of your own people, but you shall
heart and with all your soul and with all your might."
love your neighbor as yourself I am the LORD's Deuteronomy dausall Cama v
89. Henry, Christian Personal Ethics, 221-22.
90. Geisler, Ethics, 179. Though we like the way Ceiler's point is phrased it can give the impression that our bodies
are somehow unimportant in light of our souls. This would be a wrong impression-our bodies are very important
10.C. design for our lives overal. See Proverbs 4-22; 1 Corina lars 6.19 206imothy 4:7-8; and 3 John 1.2.
91. C. S. Lewis, The Abolition of Man (New York: Macmillan, 1973), 56-57.
things that are seen are transient, but the things that are unseen are eternal."
92. Second Corinthians 4:18: "As we look not to the things that are seen but to the things that are unseen. For the
23. Francis A. Schaeffer, How Should We Then Live? (Old Tappan, NJ: Fleming H. Revell, 1976), 145.
94. Lewis, Abolition of Man, 78.
95. Jonathan Haidt, The Righteous Mind (New York: Pantheon, 2012), 14, 99.
96. Charles Taylor, A Secular Age (Cambridge, MA: Belknap, 2007), 38-39.
9). Dietrich Bonhoeffer, Letters and Papers from Prison (New York: Touchstone Books, 1997), 5.
98. For biblical examples of ethically responsible men and women, see Hebrews 11.32-12:3.
