# Chapter 14

<!-- page-1 (book p.337) -->

A •
CHAPTER
1. ANIMAL FARM
It was just after the sheep had returned, on a pleasant eve-
ning when the animals had finished work and were making their
way back to the farm buildings, that the terrified neighing of
a horse sounded from the yard. Startled, the animals stopped
in their tracks. It was Clover's voice. She neighed again, and all
the animals broke into a gallop and rushed into the yard. Then
they saw what Clover had seen.
It was a pig walking on his hind legs.
Yes, it was Squealer. A little awkwardly, as though not quite
used to supporting his considerable bulk in that position. But
with perfect balance, he was strolling across the yard.


<!-- page-2 (book p.339) -->

And a moment later, out from the door of the farmhouse came a long file of pigs, all
walking on their hind legs. Some did it better than others, one or two were even a trife
unstead and looked as though they would have liked the support of a stick, but every
one of them made his way right round the yard succesfully. And finally there was a
tremendous baying of dogs and a shrill crowing from the black cockerel, and out came
Napoleon himself, majestically upright, casting haughty glances from side to side, and
with his dogs gamboling round him.
He carried a whip in his trotter.
There was a deadly silence. Amazed, terrified, huddling together, the animals watched
the long line of pigs march slowly round the yard. It was as though the world had turned
upside down. Then there came a moment when the first shock had worn off and when, in
spite of everything— in spite of their terror of the dogs, and of the habit, developed through
long years, of never complaining, never criticizing, no matter what happened-they might
have uttered some word of protest. But just at that moment, as though at a signal, all the
sheep burst out into a tremendous bleating of-
"Four legs good, two legs better! Four legs good, two legs better! Four legs good, two legs
better!"
It went on for five minutes without stopping. And by the time the sheep had quieted
down, the chance to utter any protest had passed, for the pigs had marched back into
the farmhouse.
Benjamin felt a nose nuzzling at his shoulder. He looked round. It was Clover. Her old
eyes looked dimmer than ever. Without saying anything, she tugged gently at his mane
and led him round to the end of the big barn, where the Seven Commandments were
written. For a minute or two they stood gazing at the tatted wall with its white lettering.
"My sight is failing" she said finally. "Even when I was young I could not have read what
was written there. But it appears to me that that wall looks different. Are the Seven
Commandments the same as they used to be, Benjamin?"
For once Benjamin consented to break his rule, and he read out to her what was written
on the wall. There was nothing there now except a single Commandment. It ran,
ALL ANIMALS ARE EQUAL,
BUT SOME ANIMALS ARE MORE EQUAL THAN OTHERS!
So goes the stunning conclusion of George Orwell's Animal Farm, a political satire in
which the prize boar Old Major describes his dream of liberation from the drunken Mr. Jones,
inspiring the animals to revolt When the dust settles the pigs-having taught themselves
to read and write-take charge and gradually change the rules to benefit themselves. They
lie, manipulate, and exploit the other animals until misery proves the revolution a farce and
the new laws meaningless. In the end, the pigs make peace with humans. Too late, the rest o
the creatures realized the truth that life after the revolution was better for the pigs but worse
for the rest of them.
2. SLAVERY AND FREEDOM
As the Roman statesman Cicero claimed, "Legum servi sumus ut liberi esse possimus" "W
are slaves of the law so that we may be free")? The Latin word for law Cicero used, legum,
is the word from which we get our words legislate and legislature. The study of law revolves
around the question,
«What constitutes orderly and just
governance?"
It is a human paradox that to be free we must abide by
laws that constrain our freedom. Either we must discipline
ourselves to submit to an orderly way of life, or we will
be forced to submit to tyranny. As Edmund Burke said,
Law: the study of
ordinances designed
to help citizens
coexist peacefully.
"Society cannot exist unless a controlling power upon will
and appetite be placed somewhere, and the less of it there
is within, the more there must be without. It is ordained in
the eternal constitution of things, that men of intemperate
minds cannot be free. Their passions forge their fetters?"
A society's measured pursuit of just laws is one of
It is a human paradox
that to be free we must
abide by laws that
constrain our freedom.
the primary factors that determine its level of thriving.
Lawmakers and legal scholars must consider whether the law sufficiently punishes evildoing
while, at the same time, avoids harming the initiative of hardworking law abiders. Liberty
and justice for all.
America's founders wondered whether such a system was truly possible and whether
the people genuinely had the will to sustain it. As Benjamin Franklin emerged from the
constitutional convention, a bystander, Mrs. Powel, asked, "Well, Doctor, what have we got?
A republic or a monarchy?" "A republic," replied Franklin, "if you can keep it." Franklin
understood what was at stake. Whether the people were prepared for self-government was
tar from certain.
Closer to our own time, Judge Learned Hand said,
I often wonder whether we do not rest our hopes too much upon constitutions, upon
laws and upon courts. These are false hopes; believe me, these are false hopes. Liberty
lie in the hearts of men and women; when it dies there, no constitution, no law, no
court can even do much to help it. While it lies there it needs no constitution, no law,
no court to save it.5
The message is clear: if there is no love of liberty in the heart, there will be no law ot
liberty in the land.
There is reason for similar uncertainty todav. Harold I. Berman, former professor of law
at Harvard Law School, believed law was rooted in religion and transcendent qualities. These
foundational beliefs, he said, are giving way to laws "geared more to expediency and less to
morality.... As a result," he concluded, "the historical soil of the Western legal tradition is
being washed away ... and the tradition itself is threatened with collapse"
What set this collapse in motion? Berman believed the dam broke in the aftermath of
World War 1(1914-1918) How could the most enlightened. best educated, most scientifi
cally astute nations in the world mow one another down in frichtening numbers? Berman


<!-- page-3 (book p.341) -->

was less concerned with who was at fault than with the realization that all of the Wests lega
structures could not prevent the near destruction of civilization.
The question now comes to us. Will we be able to maintain a law society amid the
challenges of our own time? Ma, digs acople do not believe Christians are capable of doing
anything with law except using it to make people miserable. Are they right? Let's seek an
answer by digging into a bit of the history and purpose of law. Along the way well exam-
ine each of the six worldviews were considering and conclude with an examination of the
Christian worldview, which makes what most people will doubtless think is a radical claim:
the structure of law derives from God, who is simultaneously beyond us (transcendent) and
with us (immanent). Because he is beyond us, his character forms the enduring definition
of all that is good. Because he is with us, his law applies to all people in all places at all times.
3. OVERVIEW OF LAW
What constitutes orderly and just governance? To answer this question, let's look sepa-
rately at both order and justice.
Order. Nothing happens in our communities without laws establishing order. Most of us,
if we're thirsty, think nothing of going to the kitchen sink to get a drink of water. For this to
happen, predictability and safety must be a function of
law. Water comes into your dwelling courtesy of a water
aspect of the law that
focuses on ensuring safety
district governing the acquisition, testing, delivery, and
proper disposal of water. This includes regulations about
which kinds of pipes will be used, how those pipes will
be installed, how agreements will be made for laying
pipe across private-property boundaries, who should
fix broken pipes, how taxes are to be collected to pay for this maintenance, how the water is
to be acquired in the first place, what price people will be charged for it, how they will pay,
and what happens when they do not.
All of these are administrative regulations. They are a part of our law but are focused
more on order than justice. If a water pipe breaks, people may be irked at the inconvenience.
It would be stretching it if they complained of an injustice having been committed against
them in the same way if someone had intentionally broken the pipes or was hoarding all the
water for himself.
One of the earliest sources of administrative regulations is actually recorded in what
Jewish people call the Torah, which contains the Mosaic law. Reading these laws today can be
confusing, especially since laws about crime are mixed in with laws about personal hygiene,
diet, disease prevention, and even compensation for personal injury.
I's important to keep in mind, however, that the idea of a written law was almost un-
heard of in the world at that time, and these were former slaves who should have had little
if any, idea of how to govern themselves. Much was at stake. In a desert land surrounded by
hostile, wicked forces and with no natural sources of food and water, even small mistakes
could doom the community.
Much of the law God revealed to Moses still forms the basis for law today, especially in
the West. Take, for example, Exodus 21:33: "When a man opens a pit, or when a man digs a
pit and does not cover it, and an ox or a donkey talls into it, the owner of the pit shall make
restoration. He shall give money to its owner, and the dead beast shall be his." This law es-
tablished relationships between neighbors. In relerence to a case about a conflict between
two neighbors, Lord Atkin said in the nineteenth century,
The rule that you are to love your neighbour becomes in law: You must not injure your
neighbour, and the lawyer's question: Who is my neighbour? receives a restricted reply.
You must take reasonable care to avoid acts or omissions which you can reasonably
foresee would be likely to injure your neighbour. Who, then, in law, is my neighbour?
The answer seems to be persons who are so closely and directly affected by my act
that I ought reasonably to have them in contemplation as being so affected when 1 am
directing my mind to the acts or omissions which are called into question.?
The biblical principles regarding neighbors' obligations to one another became the basis
of tort law (from the Latin word torquere, meaning "twisted out of its natural shape*). Tort
law governs harms that can come as people live and work
together. It includes remedies for things like negligence,
which is when a person harms another person through
carelessness when that person was obligated to have been
more careful. In securing order, though, it is possible
to hurt people in violation of the law. This leads to the
second function of law, securing justice.
Tort Law: the area of
law governing remedies
for those wronged by
others, such as through
negligence.
Justice. In defining justice, Yale University's Nicholas
Wolterstorff said, "A society is just insofar as its members enjoy the goods to which they have a
right? This assumes, of course, that there is a higher law that has been revealed. The founders
of America referred to securing liberty, not granting it. The Constitution of the United States
is formed around this premise, as is evident in its preamble:
We the People of the United States, in Order to form a more perfect Union, establish
Justice, insure domestic Tranquility, provide for the common defence, promote the
general Welfare, and secure the Blessings of Liberty to ourselves and our Posterity, do
ordain and establish this Constitution for the United States of America.
By securing liberty, the Constitution assumes that laws are discovered, not develope;
found, not created. Most of the founders believed this is so because everyone can observe
Gods revelation in nature it they have not suppressed their ability to observe it by otner
commitments. On this basis, it is possible to establish a body of laws to remove barriers to
economic arrangements, create a framework for resolving disputes, establish accountability
that restrains evil, and provide a better environment in which everyone is allowed to flourish
if they choose to do so.
Of course, some philosophers have tried to develop a basis for justice apart trom referen.-
ing God's nature and character. Many law textbooks, for example, go back to the philosophy
of utilitarianism, as Jeremy Bentham (1748-1832) articulated it: "Nature has placed mankind
under the governance of two sovereign masters, pain and pleasure, he said." Bentham be
greatest number of people.
lieved justice could be secured through a "felicific calculus"-the greatest happiness for the


<!-- page-4 (book p.343) -->

Wolterstorff strongly disagrees with Bentham. The
The pursuit of happiness
is problematic because
our idea of happiness
today has little to do with
creating space for living
virtuously.
pursuit of happiness (eudaimonia, the Greek word for
"a life well lived") is problematic because our idea of
happiness today has little to do with creating space
for living virtuously. Trying to make everybody happy
would only result in using government coercion to give
people what they want." It would be legal, but it might
In order to secure justice, we have to get to the root of the question "What is legal?
versus "What is right?" In the twentieth century this came to a head in the Nuremberg
trials of the major war criminals after World War II. Were these trials legitimate? After all,
Germany had a body of laws and a court system. If the highest law is the law of the state,
then everything the Nazis did was legal. Clearly these monsters needed to be punished,
but on what basis?
If law is based on morality known by everyone at all times in all cultures, the answer is
straightforward. Nazi law was a perversion of clear standards that were obvious to anyone and
should thus, by its nature, have been deemed illegal. Secularists, though, cannot rationally
take this perspective. From their viewpoint, there is no revealed morality. Because we are
evolving as human beings, our morality changes to meet our new circumstances.
This question was not resolved. In Nuremberg the international community proceeded
even though the laws the Nazis were accused of breaking did not exist when they were
in power. What gave theAllied forces the right to try
the Nazis? Because they assumed power by winning
Legal Positivism: the belief
that laws are rules created
by human authorities and
that there is no inherent
or necessary connection
between law and morality.
the war? If power is a sufficient basis for law, did the
Nazis have the right to do what they wanted as long
as they were in power? Would they have been justified
to continue their atrocities had they won the war? If
The fiercest debate on this issue was carried out be-
tween two legal scholars, H. L. A. Hart and Lon Fuller.
Natural Law: the belief
that laws are rules based
upon on an internal code
of morality possessed by
all people.
Hart argued for legal positivism, which says that law is
what those who have the authority agree to do. Fuller, on
the other hand, took a natural law view: law should be
based on an internal morality that all people possess!?
In his book on the subject, Fuller, a law professor at
Harvard, said just laws are based on eight rules:
1. The rules must be spelled out so people will know what to do and what not to do.
2. The rules must be publicized so people will know about them.
3. The rules must not be used to judge actions taken before the rules were adopted.
4. The rules must be clear and understandable.
5. The rules must not contradict one another.
6. It must be within the power of the people affected to follow the rules.
7. The rules must not be changed frequently, or the people who are to follow them will
be unable to decide what to do.
8, Those in charge of enforcing the rules must actually do so.!4
These common sense principles, constantly referred to in debates about whether certain
laws are appropriate, provide the basis for legal standards to this day.
Since the time of Fuller, though, the focus has moved to "justice as fairness, or using
the law to redistribute society's goods in order to compensate for unfair advantages some
are said to have received. In A Theory of Justice, widely considered the most important work
oflegal philosophy of our time, the late Harvard professor John Rawls proposed a new kind
ofjustice called distributive justice. "These principles are the principles of social justice he
wrote. "They provide a way of assigning rights and duties in the basic institutions of society
and they define the appropriate distribution of the benefits and burdens of social coopera-
tion""5 There are obviously many controversies surrounding this view, and we will examine
them in a little more detail in the upcoming chapter on politics.
As with each discipline we have examined, we'll now look at the radically different views
of law that each of the six different worldviews hold.
4. SECULARISM
As we have seen, Secularists believe morality to be both constructed by humans and
subject to change. If there is no such thing as an objective standard of right and wrong, how-
ever, then laws designed to ensure fairness and justice might actually create unfairness and
injustice. After all, Secularist theology says God does not exist or is irrelevant, and that only
matter exists (materialism). Secularist biology and sociology, on the assumption that only
matter exists, assume that everything around us can be explained through natural processes
(naturalism. These two assumptions form the secular view of society, according to Julian
Huxley: "Our present knowledge indeed forces us to the view that the world of reality is
evolution —a single process of self-transformation. Natural processes, Secularists assume,
have selected humans as the most advanced species. Secularists trust themselves to create
a just legal system because, as Malachi Martin pointed out, "we ourselves are the author
of our destiny. Man is exalted. The God-Man is repudiated; and with him, the idea of man's
fallenness is rejected?"
The key understanding of Secularist law is that it must be created to respond to where
we think we are in our evolutionary process. This is far different from the Western traditio
of common law, which is the basis of law in the United States. In common law, there are
few written laws. From the law's perspective (we are not
aking about a moral perspective here, it is assumed
that an action is legal unless it is specifically prohib-
Common Law: a legal
ted. If a dispute arises, a judge hears the case, examines
system in which courts
reach legal decisions
previous similar cases, and finally makes a ruling. This
form of ruling is called stare decisis, which is Laun for
based upon prior judicial
it stands decided. The judge then explains his or her
precedent reached through
ruling in writing.
common sense and reason.


<!-- page-5 (book p.345) -->

In the Western tradition, legal writings form a body of what is called case law. Lawyers
study these cases and compose briets to persuade judges to see the cases the way they think
gives their clients an advantage. is a certain tax deauction legal to know the answer, you
have to delve into court cases where people challenged the law to see what the judge decided.
If the Internal Revenue Service challen un mour deduction, and you decide to take the case to
court, you can assume a judge will look at previous cases to determine your case.
Common law assumes that what people did in the past was based on common sense
and reason, and that it should set a precedent for what to do now. Attorneys get paid to scan
history and pluck out cases they think are relevant and try to persuade judges to see it their
way. Juries of citizens are often involved and are trusted to determine whether an injustice
has occurred. A verdict of guilty or not guilty is then
rendered.
Common law assumes
that what people did
in the past was based
on common sense and
reason, and that it
should set a precedent for
what to do now.
Here's the problem from the Secularist viewpoint: If
you believe humanity is evolving and that people in the
past were ignorant and unenlightened, why would you
care about precedent? You wouldn't. Newer is better. For
example, when the late United States Supreme Court
Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, appeared on Egyptian
television, she publicly lamented having "a rather old
constitution." She recommended Egyptians Look to
newer, "better" constitutions than the US Constitution.'
As you might imagine, Darwin's evolutionary theory profoundly influenced the Secularist
conception of law. Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr., a famous twentieth-century Supreme Court
justice, said, "I see no reason for attributing to man a significance different in kind from that
which belongs to a baboon or a grain of sand."9 Holmes thought our own time demanded
something more than common sense or reason: "The felt necessities of the time, the prevalent
moral and political theories, intuitions of public policy, avowed or unconscious, even the
prejudices which judges share with their fellow-men, have a good deal more to do than the
syllogism in determining the rules by which men should be governed."20
If we are really no diferent from baboons in need only of laws that fit the necessities of
our time, Secularists assume that we'll have a better society when we set aside the archaic laws
of the past and explore new legal ground. Political scientist Bradley C. S. Watson describes
Secularists as follows:
Whatever the theoretical roots or disciplinary orientations of the realists, all saw the
Constitution as a fundamentally flawed document and decried any efforts to inter-
pret it on its own terms. Statutory law, and even more the Constitution, was seen as
an epiphenomenon of deep class biases and social forces unrelated to principles of
right or justice. At the same time, it was assumed the best and brightest could extract
themselves from the influence of these social phenomena that swept others along like
tiny corks on a great river. Given a clear-eyed view of what law "really" is, along with
sympathetic legislatures, the right kinds of sociological arguments, and, eventually,
a less conservative judiciary, they could put themselves in the vanguard of history?!
Obviously, this kind of thinking does not lead to
confidence in a natural law that is true for all times in
alcultures. Secularist philosopher Delos McKown asks
This denial of natural
sarcastically, "When, one wonders, in evolutionary his-
rights leads to a denial
of natural law.
tory did hominids first acquire natural rights?" For
Paul Kurt, Nost... Ights have evolved out or the cultural, economic, political, and social
structures that have prevalled. This ck nial or natural rights leads to a denial of natural law:
"How are these principles ot equallty, treedou, etc. to be justined, asked Kurtz. They are
ru : derived trom a divine or natural law, nor do they have any special metaphysica. status
They are rules offered to govern how we shall behave. They can be justified only by reference
to their results 24
If laws and rights are not—as the signers of the
Declaration of Independence thought-derived from
the "Laws of Nature and Nature's God," where do they
come from? The answer is legal positivism, which says
that law is not tied to morality. Rather, it is whatever the
order of things declares it to be. Les Greene, professor of
philosophy at Oxford University, offers a thorough and
If laws and rights are
not-as the signers
of the Declaration of
Independence thought-
derived from the "Laws of
Nature and Nature's God,"
where do they come from?
clear definition of legal positivism:
What laws are in force in that system depends on what social standards its officials
recognize as authoritative; for example, legislative enactments, judicial decisions, or
social customs.... According to positivism, law is a matter of what has been posited
(ordered, decided, practiced, tolerated, etc.); as we might say in a more modern idiom,
positivism is the view that law is a social construction.25
Legal positivism says that law is what those in power choose to do. To put it plainly,
"might makes right." Morality and law are not related, except by coincidence. According to
Max Hocutt, "Human beings may, and do, make up their own rules. All existing moralities
and all existing laws are human artifacts, po ›ducts of human society, social conventions.2
So where did we ever get the idea that laws were based in objective standards? To Roscoe
Pound, one of the twentieth century's most cited legal authorities, governments gave that
impression in their efforts to convince the governed that law was a fixed thing:
from the time when lawgivers gave over the attempt to maintain the general security
by belief that particular bodies of human law had been divinely dictated or divinely
revealed or divinely sanctioned, they have had to wrestle with the problem or provid
mankind that the law was something fixed and settled, whose autory Was ben
question, while at the same time enabling it to make constant readjustments and oc
casional radical changes under the pressure of infinite and variable human desires."
As judges make these decisions, the idea of representative democracy gives way to wha
Robert Bork called "Olympianism," the belief that activist judges are an intellectual elite
ordained to shape a nation's destiny trom the bench.
Matter is all there is. We are evoltase g. God is irrelevant. The founders were naive. The
ideas that truth is self-evident; that all are created equal by a creator who gives unallenable


<!-- page-6 (book p.347) -->

rights to lite, liberty, and the pursuit ot happiness; and that just power is derived from the
consent of the governed, to the Secularist, are nothing more lan tells of past thinking
To the Marxist, the idea of law based on God's revelation is nothing more than a means
of controlling the workers and preventing society's evolution toward communism. Lenin said,
"In what sense do we repudiate ethics and morality?.. In the sense in which it was preached
by the bourgeoisie, who derived ethics from God's commandments. We, of course, say that
we do not believe in God.?" Since Marx did not believe in God,? it was inconceivable that laws
would be based on his will. Rather, they were based on the will of the bourgeoisie: "Your very
ideas are but the outgrowth of the conditions of your bourgeoisie production and bourgeoisie
property, just as your jurisprudence is but the will of your class made into a law for all"30
L. S. Jawitsch, a modern-day Marxist legal theorist, maintained Lenin's denial of anything
supernatural, saying,
"There are no eternal, immutable principles of law"3. But Marxists go
further: law is only necessary because economic classes exist and come into conflict with
one another. Engels said,
In order that these ... classes with conflicting economic interests, may not annihilate
themselves and society in a useless struggle, a power becomes necessary that stands
apparently above society and has the function of keeping down the conflicts and main-
taining "order." And this power, the outgrowth of society, but assuming supremacy
over it and becoming more and more divorced from it, is the State.32
Lenin affirmed this thinking: "The State is an organ of class domination, an organ of
oppression of one class by another?" Laws are thus imposed by the state to quell these
disturbances.
The Marxist reasons that if economic classes cease to exist because the proletariat (working
class) has triumphed over the bourgeoisie the property owners), then no law or government
will really be necessary. In the short run, new socialist
Laws will need to be devised to remove the exploitation
The Marxist reasons
that if economic classes
cease to exist because the
proletariat (working class)
has triumphed over the
bourgeoisie (the property
owners), then no law or
government will really be
necessary.
built into bourgeois law, but this will pass away. Accord-
ing to Jawitsch, "An anti-exploiter tendency is what char-
acterizes the special features of all the principles of the
law of socialist society in [its] most concentrated form.3
This new system of law, it is supposed, will be built
around the needs of the workers and farmers. Howard
Selsam explained:
Marxism, which has been so often accused of seek-
ing to eliminate moral considerations from human
life and history emphasizes rather the moral issues
involved in every situation. It does so, however, not by standing on a false platform of
absolute right, but by identifying itself with the real needs and interests of the workers
and farmers.35
Such a system of law must be flexible because the needs of the workers and farmers
may change through time. E. B. Pashukanıs wrote, We require that our legislation possess
maximum elasticity. We cannot fetter ourselves by any sort of system "36
The courts must be structured with the same goals. Jawitsch described law in a Marxist
society this way: As a component of the legal superstructure law is closely linked with the
political superstructure and with the state."? Lenin agreed, saying, "A court is an organ of
state power. Liberals sometimes torget that. It is a sin for a Marxist to torget it. Courts
must be reoriented to remove the vestiges of bourgeoise law by any means, including au
horizing violence. Lenin said boldly, "The revolutionary dictatorship of the proletariat is
won and maintained by the use of violence by the proletariat against the bourgeoisie, rule
that is unrestricted by any laws"" No restrictions on this power will be tolerated. Given
these assumptions, it is easy to see why Marxists are not interested in Western ideas about
According to proletariat law, only the working class is capable of deciding the laws
because only they have the necessary "class-consciousness." Of course, not every person
in the working class can make these decisions, so the
Communist Party takes on that responsibility on their
behalf. Andrey Vyshinsky explained: "There might be
collisions and discrepancies between the formal com-
mands oflaws and those of the proletarian revolution....
This collision must be solved only by the subordination
of the formal commands of law to those of party policy. 41
This is a fancy way of saying, as the pigs said in Animal
Proletariat Law:
a system of laws shaped
by Communist Party
officials that are intended
to promote the interests of
the working class over
the bourgeoisie.
Farm, "All animals are equal, but animals some are more
equal than others"42
Of course, Marxist theorists insist, this kind of brute force is made necessary only
because of capitalism. Once society has been thoroughly disinfected, all people will create
and live in an environment that promotes harmony, and the need for law will dissolve.
Criminal activity will be practically nonexistent, Marxists claim, and the causes of anti-
social activity, injustice, and inequality will cease to exist. John Plamenatz said that in a
communist society, crime will be "virtually unknown" because "motives will be less urgent
and trequent, and the offender will be more easily brought to his senses by the need to
regain the good opinion of his neighbors"43
The fact that no such society has ever materialized fails to discourage Marxists, even
today. Their faith in their underlying assumptions is so complete, they think it must be tru
If we haven't seen it yet, it is because of the ongoing power of capitalism and the retusal of
current legislatures and courts to destroy it.
But ideas have consequences: a view that fails to acknowledge the dignity of humans
as God's image bearers or the source of law as God's nature and character will have
levastating impact on society. If the ideas of Lenin, Stalin, Mao Tse-tung, Pol Pot, and
other Marxist dictators are any indication, the consequence is one of body count. Marx-
worldview in history.44
t governments have managed to kill, on purpose, more human beings than any other


<!-- page-7 -->

6. POSTMODERNISM
When Sonia Sotomayor was nominated as a United States supreme Court justice, a line
from a speech she had given at the University of California, Berkley, became the target of
scrutiny. "I would hope, she said, "that a wise Latina woman with the richness of her expe-
riences would more often than not reach a better conclusion than a white male who hasnt
lived that life"s Why would a different race entail different understandings of wisdom? It
sounds like a denial of absolute truth. President Obama, who had nominated her, took to the
television cameras to allay peoples concerns. She was quickly confirmed, and she joined the
court. However, a closer look at the entire speech, called "A Latino Judges Voice, reveals that
critics of her judicial philosophy had not taken the quote "out of context"
as the American
people were told. In her speech Sotomayor approvingly quoted Harvard Law School professor
Martha Minnow, who said, "There is no objective stance but only a series of perspectives-no
neutrality, no escape from choice in judging"46
If Justice Sotomayor thinks law cannot be neutral, that there is no basis for how one
applies the law, then what foundation is there for any true understanding of law and justice?
A graduate of one of Summit Ministries' twelve-day leadership schools was able to pose this
precise question as a US Senate staffer attending a lecture by Justice Sotomayor: "Justice
Sotomayor, what should be the foundation for understanding and applying justice in America?"
After an extended moment of silence, Sotomayor replied, "I don't think I've ever considered
that question in that form before." After another moment of silence, she concluded, "I sup-
pose for me it would be the inherent dignity of all people, but I'm not sure what it would be
for anyone else 7
Setting aside the question of how a Supreme Court justice of the United States might
have never considered the foundations of justice, Sotomayor's answer betrays something
of the Postmodern view of law. What might be a foundation for one person might not be
a foundation "for anyone else." If law has no essential nature, if there is no essential moral
truth, what does it mean to speak of people's "inherent" value? Are empirical data, objective
knowledge, objective facts, and claims of "justice" nothing more than tricks people in power
perform to make everyone else see them as right?
It's not that Postmodernists don't want justice. It's
that they view anything resulting from the power struc-
tures of Christianity and the Enlightenment as unjust.
Therefore the postmodern understanding of justice in
want justice. It's that they
view anything resulting
from the power structures
of Christianity and the
Enlightenment as unjust.
relation to the law is not actually connected to any ob-
jective standards. Rather, it is the process of uncovering
the various forms of oppression. As Daniel Farber and
Suzanna Sherry argue,
Postmodernists attack the concepts of reason and
objective truth, condemning them as components
of white male domination. They prefer the more subjective "ways of knowing" sup-
posedly favored by women and minorities, such as storytelling. As to the rule of law,
it is an article of [postmodern] faith that legal rules are indeterminate and serve only
to disguise the law's white male bias.*8
For this reason, Postmodernists are bent on sniffing out and destroying religious roots
and transcendent qualities from Western law. They embrace the fragmentation and subjec-
tivity of law because it puts the spotlight on social justice and helps create left-wing political
change. But it there is no such thing as true justice, what merit is there to Postmodernist
complaints about injustice? Figuring out the Postmodernist answer to that question requires
us to consider ideas well outside the normal bounds of
legal thought.
Postmodernism in law forms a frontal assault on
traditional Western law. Leading the attack is the critical
legal studies (CLS) movement, which for thirty years or
so has focused on publishing "critiques of law focused
on progressive-even radical-political change rather
Critical Legal Studies
(CLS): the practice of
deconstructing laws in
order to discover their
subjective meaning and
biased intent.
than on efficient government. In fact, the CLS slogan
is "Critique is all there is." As we saw in the chapter on
Postmodernism, this way of thinking is based on the
work of Jacques Derrida, who tried to show how texts of
all kinds could be "deconstructed" to reveal their hidden
meanings. Legal scholars use Derridas techniques to
dissect laws to discover how they create or contribute
to "unequal power relations."50
Social Constructionism:
the belief that human
beings and society are
social constructions
shaped by law and
subjective experience.
Postmodernists take social constructionism, the
Secularist view of sociology, a step further: if reality is
socially constructed, and if we feel oppressed, then those who did the constructing have
probably constructed reality to secure their own power ("hegemony"). Just as Foucault
saw all relationships between people as power relationships, Postmodernists assert that
objective knowledge is, as Farber and Sherry describe, "a power relation, one category of
people benefiting at the expense of another category of people""! Farber and Sherry quote
one feminist as saying,
"Feminist analysis begins with the principle that objective reality
is a myth. Universal standards of legal judgment, common to all, do not exist. Therefore,
any view of law a feminist thinks enshrines patriarchy is invalid on its face.
So what do you do if you think the law is being used improperly to enshrine a meta-
narative with which you disagree? If others have used the law to illegitimately gain power,
Postmodernists don't feel bad about using the law to get
it back. There is no objective means of knowing truth,
no objective concept of justice-
—only politics. As Stanley
Fish, professor of law and English, admits, The name of
the game has always been politics"' In the same speech
cited earlier, Sotomayor said, "I accept the proposition
If others have used the
law to illegitimately gain
power, Postmodernists
don't feel bad about using
the law to get it back.
that, as Judge Resnick describes it, to judge is an exercise
of power? "54
So let's see if we've got this: objective reasoning is bad, and law is not about justice but
about political power. If these statements are accurate, why should we listen to Postmodern-
ists? They're just as biased as anyone else. Recognizing this problem, some Postmodernists


<!-- page-8 (book p.351) -->

have decided to stop trying to make logical arguments to appeal to the mind and start telling
stories that appeal to the heart. Farber and Sherry explain:
Because the scholarship of women and people of color reflects their distinctive knowl.
edge (gained from listening to and telling stories), the radical multiculturalists argue,
it cannot be judged or tested by traditional standards. Instead, they imply, it should
be judged according to its political effect it should be judged "in terms of its ability
to advance the interests of the outsider community, because "outsider scholarship is
often aimed not at understanding the law, but at changing it."55
If this idea of changing the law rather than understanding it sounds familiar, it's because
it is. This is how Marx viewed the academic disciplines; we should harness them to change
the world in our image. The change Postmodernists pursue is not aimed toward any stable
sense of justice; rather, it is driven by a sense of inevitable injustice. As a case in point, here
is Justice Sotomayor's questionable quotation in its full context:
Justice O'Connor has often been cited as saying that a wise old man and wise old woman
will reach the same conclusion in deciding cases. I am not so sure Justice O'Connor
is the author of that line.... I am also not so sure that I agree with the statement. First,
as Professor Martha Minnow has noted, there can never be a universal definition of
wise. Second, I would hope that a wise Latina woman with the richness of her expe-
riences would more often than not reach a better conclusion than a white male who
hasn't lived that life. 56
To Postmodernists, this makes perfect sense. "Law" isn't based on any objective truth.
It's just the perspective a person brings to a situation. Justice Sotomayor thinks this would
lead to better decisions. But couldn't it just as well lead to worse ones?
In 2006 a part-time stripper named Crystal Gail Mangum accused three members of
the Duke University lacrosse team of rape. After a thorough and very public examination
of the evidence, all charges were dropped and the students were proclaimed innocent.
Prosecuting attorney Mike Nifong lost his law license because of several ethical viola-
tions. During the process, a group of eighty-eight Duke University professors signed an
advertisement in a Duke newspaper implying that the charges were true. Forsaking the
principle of "innocent until proven guilty, one of the professors behind the advertisement,
Wahneema Lubiano, called the lacrosse players "almost perfect offenders" and "exemplars
of the upper end of the class hierarchy, the politically dominant race and ethnicity, the
dominant gender, the dominant sexuality, and the dominant social group on campus"
and promised to pursue the issue "regardless of the 'truth' established... and 'whatever
happens with the court case? "57
In the mind of Lubiano, the story Magnum told was true even though it didn't accord
with the facts, because it nonetheless fit Lubiano's conception of how the world is. Lubia-
no's actions, along with the other eighty-seven professors who joined her crusade, created
an emotional backlash against the lacrosse players (one professor even flunked two of th
to do so). The lives of many people were upended, and many reputations were besmirched.
players without justification, a decision she reversed only when a court decision forced her
Much injustice was done in the service of a story that rang true for people who could
by powerful white men.
imagine, as has happened in history, a powerless, young black woman being mistreated
Farber and Sherry illustrate how this shift influences legal theory: "Rather than relying
ely on legal or interdisciplinary authorities, empirical data, or rigorous analysis, legal
scholars have begun to offer stories, often about their own real or imagined experiences "58 If
logic and dispassionate reasoning are tools of white male bias, then stories confirming thi
must be true, whether they are factual or not.
Trial lawver Gary Saalman predicts the results of a postmodern focus on racial. gender.
and cultural politics becoming an integral part of the legal system:
Postmodern legal theory trickles down to breed cynicism toward al government and
the entire criminal justice system. This, then, is the real issue. No one questions the
fact that law requires interpretation, or that judges or juries may have acted unfairly,
sometimes based on race or gender bias. The question is this: How do we view such
unfairness? Do we accept that all people must inevitably be unfair and subjective, as
postmodernists claim? Or do we recognize such unfairness as the evil it is and resist
it? When we accept what postmodernism preaches, we lose all basis for calling the
system to fairness. We instead challenge minority populations to pursue power so
they can take their turn."
Saalman's point is worth taking seriously. Yes, injustice exists, but which response is the
better remedy: to search for true justice or to cynically abandon the idea of justice altogether?
Postmodernists say they speak for the dispossessed, but by their own admission, they
are merely trying to grab the reins of power from the hands of others. If what they say about
the powerlessness of minorities and women is true, though, this is a risky strategy. It is pre-
carious to advocate the use of raw power when you are
not the one who possesses it. In the end, Postmodernism
depends for its success on whether people who actually
believe in justice are touched by its stories of injustice.
We are not aware of any other worldview like this, which
depends for its success on the goodwill of those whose
sensibilities have been refined by their thoroughgoing
rejection of its underlying assumptions.
Postmodernists say
they speak for the
dispossessed, but by their
own admission, they are
merely trying to grab the
reins of power from the
hands of others.
7. NEW SPIRITUALITY
New Spiritualists do not spend much energy discussing law, justice, and judgment. They
prefer instead to concentrate on personal inner development, getting in touch with the God
within. As Marianne Williamson says, "As extensions of God, we are ourselves the spirit of
compassion, and in our right minds, we don't seek to judge but to heal.
The unwillingnees of New Spiritualists to develop a coherent theorv of law, though
carries great implications for all of society. If each of us is a god, we can decide the legality
of an action only by getting in touch with our inner gods. Each of us is his or her own legal
authority, and any manifestation of outside authority hinders our communication with our
godhood. Shakti Gawain explains:


<!-- page-9 (book p.353) -->

The real problem with commitment to an external form is that it doesn't allow room
for the inevitable changes and growth of people and relationships. If you promise to
fool or behave by a certain set of rules, eventually you are going to have to choose
between being true to yourself and being true to those rules.61
If we choose to honor a set of rules other than inner truth, we sacrifice our godhood.
Gawain reiterates what happens when we look to authority outside ourselves. "When we
consistentlv suppress and distrust our intuitive knowingness, looking instead for Texternal
authority, validation, and approval from others, we give our personal power away?62
New Spiritualists, then, focus on their own power, authority, and rules as they purste
higher consciousness. Gawain explains: "As each of us connects with our inner spiritua
awareness, we learn that the creative power of the universe is within us. We also learn that
we can create our own reality and take responsibility for doing so."63
We struggle with what to call this, because it is more of a form of personal empow-
erment than a concept of law. Perhaps we should call it self-law. It does not say that the
law is in our hearts but that there is no law except that
Self-law: the legal
which is in our hearts. Anything hindering our search
perspective that maintains
for higher consciousness is bad. David Spangler, through
actions are lawful only
the voice of what he claimed was a channeled spirit,
if honorable to the god
said, "Their world (of darkness) is under the law and
within and unlawful if
shall disappear"64
imposed by an outside
Having an inadequate concept of law makes it diffi-
authority.
cult for New Spiritualists to grapple with difficult realities
like crime. According to Kevin Ryerson, "Mankind, and
all life is basically good"s People who commit crimes are guilty not of violating a standard
of justice but of succumbing to the pain experienced by falling short in their quest for higher
consciousness Ekhart Tolle seems to even relish this kind oflegal defense: "To my knowledge
so far, no defense lawyer has said to the judge—although the day may not be far off - This is
a case of diminished responsibility. My client's pain-body was activated, and he did not know
what he was doing. In fact, he didn't do it. His pain-body did."66
In the New Spiritualist worldview, achieving higher
consciousness is the most important thing. Mark Satin
In the New Spiritualist
worldview, achieving
says, "Getting in touch with our selves would appear to
higher consciousness is
be, not just fun (though it can be that), and not self-in-
the most important thing.
dulgence at all, but an imperative for survival thats built
right in to the structure of the universe. (Maybe even an
saying, "I always tell my students [to] go where your body and soul want to go. When you
evolutionary imperative.) *6 Joseph Campbell agreed,
have the feeling, then stay with it and don't let anvone throw you off"68 People should follow
their bliss according to Campbell 69 What implications follow the application of this to law
and justice? New Spiritualists aren't worried—the search for higher consciousness goes on.
Freedom House, a nonprofit organization cataloging the state of freedom in the world's
nations, reioiced in its 2013 report that despite an overall decrease in freedom in the world,
at least one Muslim-dominated nation, Egypt, was freer after its revolution than before,?
The researchers at Freedom House, though, have missed one of the most significant aspects
of this revolution. The president of Egypt at the time of their report, Mohamed Morsi, is a
member of the Muslim Brotherhood, a group deeply committed to Islamizing the world T
a presidential address, Morsi led the crowd in a call and response:
Mohamed Morsi: The Koran is our constitution.
Crowd: The Koran is our constitution.
Mohamed Morsi: The Prophet Muhammad is our leader.
Crowd: The Prophet Muhammad is our leader.
Mohamed Morsi: Jihad is our path.
Crowd: Jihad is our path.
Mohamed Morsi: And death for the sake of Allah is our most lofty aspiration.
Crowd: And death for the sake of Allah is our most lofty aspiration.
Mohamed Morsi: Above all-Allah is our goal.
Morsi followed this chant with a pledge to aggressively implement shariah law: "The
sharia, then the sharia, and finally, the sharia. This nation will enjoy blessing and revival only
through the Islamic sharia? Morsi was later deposed in a military coup and died during
his trial. But that someone with Morsi's beliefs could take over such an influential nation is
unsettling, to say the least.
Western observers cannot understand the incredible implications of this speech without
an understanding of Islam's highly developed and detailed legal traditions. Unlike the Chris-
tan worldview, Islam teaches that God reveals only his law, not himself?" The body flaws
based on this revelation, shariah, is seen as divine law, coeternal with God.? Indeed, "the
Shariah itself is considered to be a timeless manifesta-
tin of the will of God, subject neither to history nor
circumstance? The goal of Muslim jurists, according
to journalist and Islam expert Malise Ruthen, "is not
law making, but figh-understanding or knowledge of
alaw deemed to exist already 75 Understanding sha-
riah law involves a thorough study of four sources: the
Quran, the Sunnah (the practice of Muhammad), the
ima (consensus of the Islamic communitv), and giyas
(analogical reasoning). It specifies five categories of
laws: acts that are commanded forbidden, disapproved,
recommended, and indifferent.
Shariah Law: Derived
primarily from the Quran
and Sunnah, shariah law
is the moral and legal
code that governs the
lives of Muslims. Shariah
addresses a wide variety
of subjects, such as diet,
hygiene, prayer, contracts,
business, crime, and
punishment.


<!-- page-10 -->

For legal scholar Havva G. Guney-Ruebenacker, shariah law is primarily for the purpose
of protecting "human life, human reason, offspring, right to property and freedom of speech.""
But when the provisions of shariah are taken together, most Westerners would be horrified:
killing of homosexuals, adulterers, apostates (people who leave Islam), and blasphemers
(anyone who says anything negative about Allah or the prophet Muhammad). Marital rape
is condoned, amputation oflimhs for theft is commanded, and whipping, selling into slavery.
and oppressing nonconverts is demanded, as is the nonnegotiable duty of war against infidels 78
What impact does this have on America? Journalist Paul Williams, an unabashed Sec-
ularist, is deeply alarmed:
If Islam continues to grow at its present rate, critical mass will be achieved by 2020 and
the eventual Muslim transformation of America will become a statistical possibility. This
is not to say that sharia will be the law of the land, but it is to affirm that the religion
of the prophet will be a force that cannot be denied by our elected officials. Demands
will be met; concessions granted.?
A Muslim Brotherhood strategy document discovered, translated, and entered into the
transcript of a 2007 trial of leaders of the Holy Land Foundation for supporting a foreign
terrorist organization supported Williams's concern. This document read, in part,
The process of settlement is a "Civilization-Jihadist Process" with all the word means.
The Ikhwan [Islamic religious militia] must understand that their work in America is a
kind of grand Jihad in eliminating and destroying the Western civilization from within
and "sabotaging" its miserable house by their hands and the hands of the believers so
that it is eliminated and God's religion is made victorious over all other religions. 80
Whether the Muslim Brotherhood has the resources to carry out this mission, and whether
the American people have the political will to resist it remains to be seen.
The greatest concern shariah-law critics express is the inevitability of human rights
violations, the destruction of due process, and the cor-
The greatest concern
ruption of those nations following it. Lord Acton coined
shariah-law critics express
the now-famous phrase, "Power tends to corrupt; abso-
is the inevitability of
lute power corrupts absolutely.! Humans should not be
human rights violations,
trusted with too much power. In the United States, this
the destruction of
has led to a distribution of power among the branches of
due process, and the
government, the executive, the legislative, and the judi-
corruption of those
cial. This division balances power and checks its abuse.
nations following it.
Islam, as we have seen earlier in this volume, does
not share the sin-nature view. Ruthven says,
Because the Islamist model is predicated on the belief in government by morally
impecable individuals who can be counted on to resist temptation, it does not gen-
erate institutions capable of functioning autonomously by means of structural checks
and balances. Political institutions function only as a result of the virtue of those
who run them, but virtue can become widespread only if society is already Islamic.®
- 554. -
Muslims do not share the view that leaders inherently tend toward corruption, and
thus they much mare willing to abide authoritarian governmert No wonder nations
with a predominately Muslim population tend toward dictatorship or monarchy. In it
report Freedom in the World 2013, Freedom House listed forty-seven nations that receive.
a rating of "not free." Of the countries in the Middle East and North Africa, most of which
66 percent were not free.83
have Muslim governments and largely Muslim populations, only 22 percent were free, and
In Saudi Arabia, churches are prohibited from being built. Christians must worship
in the privacy of their own homes and refrain from even praying out loud so that faithful
Muslims can remain untainted by Christianity. In Algeria, a law passed in 2005 pronounced
as criminal any means of enticing a Muslim to another religion, including even producing,
storing, or distributing "printed documents or audio-visual formats or any other format or
means which seeks to shake the faith of a Muslim."34
So far, opposition to Islamic law's growth is limited. Shariah law is spreading rapidly, and
people seem incapable of speaking up against it. This may be changing. In 2011, a group of
reform-minded Muslims issued a statement that read, in part,
Like all totalitarianisms, Islamism is nurtured by fears and frustrations. The preachers
of hate bet on these feelings in order to form battalions destined to impose a world
of inequality. But we clearly and firmly state: nothing, not even despair, justifies the
choice of obscurantism, totalitarianism and hatred.85
Whether this call to action will be heeded, or whether it is too little, too late, cannot
be known at the present time. Much depends on how proponents of democratic freedom
respond.
Even a casual look at Freedom House's "Map of
Freedom" reveals an undeniable link between freedom
and worldview Against the Muslim tendency toward
Law cannot be discussed
in isolation from other
aspects of a worldview.
totalitarianism, the nations with the highest regard for
basic human rights and the rule of law are those influ-
enced most by Christianity. Law cannot be discussed in isolation from other aspects of a
worldview In order to retain personal freedoms within a society, a legal system must have a
sustainable foundation. Ideas have consequences.
9. CHRISTIANITY
Christians believe that God gave us divine laws and the means of discovering them. Carl
F. H. Henry savs "God is the only Legislator. Earthly rulers and legislative bodies are alike
accountable to Him from whom stems all obligation-religious, ethical and civil (2 Chron.
20:6; Acts 17:24-31) 88
You may be thinking. Now wait a minute. You iust criticized Islamic law by saying tha
its supposed "divine inspiration" from God is what makes it so scary. Now you're saying that
Christian law is divinely inspired. What's the difference?
The issue is not one of divine inspiration but of the nature and character of that divinity
and the revelation proceeding from it. As Russell Kirk said, "To cut off Law from its ethical


<!-- page-11 -->

sources is to strike a terrible blow at the rule of law. Our premise In this section of the
chapter will be as follows: Christians, in acknowledging humans as image bearers of God
but also taking into account human fallenness, have created a system of justice that, while
imperfect, has provided for greater order and justice than any other system. We will examine
this claim by discussing the basic precepts of Christian law, a Christian view of natural lav,
and the implications of applying a biblical view to society.
Christian law consists of six basic precepts:
1. The source of all divine law is the character and nature of God. Francis Schaeffer said,
"God has a character, and His character is the law of the universe" Not all things are
the same to God. Some things conform to his character, and some do not.
2. The moral order proceeds from and reflects the character of God— his holiness, justice,
truth, love, and mercy. God's moral order is as real as the physical order.
3. We are created in God's image and thus are significant. Our lives are not afterthoughts
or accidents. God established human government to protect human life, rights, and
dignity (Gen. 9:6; Rom. 13)."
4. We humans possess a nature that is in rebellion against God, and thus we need to
turn from our vain ways (Acts 14: 8-18; James 5:1-6). Because of this aspect of our
nature, we must have restraint and accountability.
5. God the creator became God the redeemer by taking on the very human form he had
created (John 1:14).93
6. God will judge the whole human race through Christ according to his standard of
good and evil (Acts 17:31; Rom. 2:16; 2 Cor. 5:10).94
To the Christian, these precepts form a moral law that is as true as the law of gravity.
People who ignore or deny the law of gravity by jumping off a tall building don't violate the
Law; they prove it. In the same way, ignoring or denying the prohibition against murder or
theft has severe consequences for a citizenry. People become discouraged, afraid, and unmo-
tivated when justice is thrown off kilter and not set right again. To quote John Whitehead,
when fundamental principles of law are undermined, "public confidence in law and public
willingness to abide by law are also sapped."5
So where should we turn to understand law? Once again, the concepts of general and
special revelation come into play not only as the basis for our understanding of God but also
for our understanding of human law% The bankruptcy of the world's legal and ethical codes
demonstrates the need for a legal system based outside human interests. John Warwick Mont-
gomery wrote, "The horrors of our recent history [have] forced us to recognize the puerile
inadequacy of tying ultimate legal standards to the mores
General Revelation:
of a particular society, even if that society is our own?
God's universal revelation
General revelation and natural law. Let's begin with
about himself and morality
that can be obtained
general revelation. God's general revelation to us is of
through nature.
both a physical and a moral character. We know this
revelation through our consciences, which provide an
innate sense of right and wrong. The apostle Paul said,
"When Gentiles, who do not have the law, by nature do what the law requires, they are a lav
to themselves, even though they do not have the law* (Rom. 2:14).
Romans 1-2 implies that all humans know a higher law exists even it they fail to obey it.
In our fallen, sinful nature, we reveal that we have an understanding of what is right. Though
we "see through a glass darkly" (1 Cor. 13:12 KJV), still we see. We know intuitively that certain
things cut against the moral order (Kom. 1:26-32): sexua. brokenness, rebellion, spitefulness,
pride, boasting, disobedience, covenant breaking, and brutality 3e
William Blackstone, one of the most influential figures in the history of law, described
the Christian view of natural law this way:
Man, considered as a creature, must necessarily be subject to the laws of his creator,
for he is an entirely dependent being... And consequently as man depends absolutely
upon his maker for everything, it is necessary that he should in all points conform to
his maker's will. This will of his maker is called the law of nature?*
Blackstone's view is consistent with the biblical account of creation, moral order, and
divine law.
Special revelation and divine law. In addition to natural law, Christian legal theory
must take into account God's special revelation of his moral order and divine law, the Bible.
Natural law gives us a general concept of right and
wrong. The Bible fleshes out that skeletal framework,
telling us what God considers moral and lawful. In the
biblical account, when God brought the nation of Israel
out of Egypt, he clearly told them not to follow the legal
structures either of Egypt, where they had been, or of
Canaan, where they were going. Instead he set Israel
apart with its own set of laws.
There seem to have been three kinds of laws in an-
Special Revelation:
God's unique revelation
about himself through
the Scriptures,
miraculous events
(e.g. dreams, visions,
prophets, prophecy,
etc.), and Jesus Christ.
cient Israel. Some were moral laws (prohibitions against
incest, adultery, sodomy, and bestiality), ceremonial laws
(laws prohibiting eating certain kinds of foods or wearing certain kinds of clothes), and judicial
laws (laws against theft or lying in economic transactions). Some of these laws seem to have
been specific to their particular situation, and the reasons for them are lost to us today. (As
an example, imagine archaeologists two thousand years in the future puzzling over why ou
society considered it illegal to drive on the left side of the road.) Other laws, though, wer
based on realities about human design, the nature of the world, and What it takes to establish
and sustain honorable homes and communities.
Throughout history Christians have seen the Bible as the only true source for discovering
the nature of rights and justice, without which we will have misery. Noah Webster put it this way:
The moral principles and precepts contained in the scriptures ought to form the basis
of all our civil constitutions and laws.... All the miseries and evils which men suffe
from vice, crime, ambition, injustice, oppression, slavery, and war, proceed from their
despising or neglecting the precepts contained in the Bible.t


<!-- page-12 -->

For Webster, if we fail to heed divine law, nothing else we do will matter:
As there is a God in heaven, who exercises a moral government over the affairs of this
world, so certainly will the neglect of the divine command, in the choice of rulers, be
followed by bad laws and a bad administration; by laws unjust or partial, by corruption,
tyranny, impunity of crimes, waste of public money, and a thousand other evils. Men
may devise and adopt new forms of government; they may amend old forms, repair
breaches, and punish violators of the constitution; there is, there can be, no effectual
remedy, but obedience to the divine law. 101
Americas Declaration of Independence was crafted on the understanding that Webster
articulated. Thomas Jefferson said,
God who gave us life gave us liberty. And can the liberties of a nation be thought
secure when we have removed their only firm basis, a conviction in the minds of the
people that these liberties are the gift of God? That they are not to be violated but with
His wrath? Indeed, I tremble for my country when I reflect that God is just; that His
justice cannot sleep forever.!°2
Though Jefferson denied much of biblical revelation, he grasped enough of God's nature
to recognize that if liberty is something humans give, then humans can take it away. It is
either inalienable or impotent.
Because of the importance of self-government to just laws, the Christian tradition not
only weighs in on what we have the right to do to others and to expect from them but also
what we have the right to do to ourselves. Gary Amos says, "Men have rights, such as the
right to life. But because a man has a duty to live his life for God, the right is unalienable. He
can defend his life against all others, but not destroy it himself. No man has the right to do
harm to himself, to commit suicide, or to waste his life."103
Other worldviews, such as Marxism, are utopian in that they insist on the absolute elim-
ination of the Marxist view of sin (capitalism) before society will function properly. As long
as any vestige of capitalism remains, Marxists will refuse to take any responsibility for the
consequences of their actions.
From a Christian viewpoint, utopian visions are
It should also be said that
the goal of Christian Law
is not to force people to
convert to Christianity
but to stabilize society by
ensuring that the innocent
are protected and the
guilty are punished.
nothing more than mere fantasies, because the law can-
not make everything turn out the way we want. We are
made in God's image, but we are fallen. Our natures are
corrupted by sin; no legal system can cause every person
to always act morally. The best we can do is develop
systems of accountability that make order and justice
more likely than not.
It should also be said that the goal of Christian law
is not to force people to convert to Christianity but to
stabilize society by ensuring that the innocent are pro-
tected and the guilty are punished. This is what God requires of us: "to act justly and to lov
mercy and to walk humbly with our God" (Mic. 6:8 NIV). As justice rises, however, the law
can shine light on God's law and how our longing for mercy and grace might be fulfilled
have a small view of God.
(Eph. 2). When society is just, people have a big view of God. When society is unjust, people
10. CONCLUSION
We've hinted throughout this chapter at something most people find patently obvious
but that must be carefully explored: Good laws don't just happen. They're the result of careful
deliberation on the part of people who have societys best interests at heart. How this happens
is something people in the domain of politics have studied for centuries. In the next chapter
we'll turn our attention toward the political realm to see it we can get beyond the stereotypes
of politicians to discern how to best use power to organize community.
ENDNOTES
1. Adapted from George Orwell, Animal Farm (Boston: Harcourt, 1949).
2. M. Tulli Ciceronis, Orationes, eds. George Long and A. J. Macleane (London: Whitaker, 1855), 2:353.
3. Edmund Burke, "Letter to Francois Louis Thibault de Menonville," published as "Letter to a Member of the
National Assembly, 1791," in Reflections on the Revolution in France (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1999), 289.
4. Comments of James McHenry, in Max Farrand, ed., The Records of the Federal Convention of 1787 (New Haven, CT:
Yale University Press), 3:85.
5. Judge Learned Hand, "The Spirit of Liberty Speech," 1944, Providence Forum, www.providenceforum.org
/spiritoflibertyspeech.
6. Harold Berman, Law and Revolution: The Formation of the Western Legal Tradition (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 1983), 39. See also the quotation and surrounding analysis in Daniel A. Farber and Suzanna Sherry, Beyond All
Reason: The Radical Assault on Truth in American Law (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1997), 39.
7. Berman, Law and Revolution, 39.
8. Berman, Law and Revolution, 40.
9. James Richard Atkin, Donoghue v, Stevenson, 1932, quoted in Carol Harlow, Understanding Tort Law, 3rd ed. (London:
Sweet and Maxwell, 2005), 47-48.
10. Nicholas Wolterstorff, Justice: Rights and Wrongs (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2008), 35.
I. uoted in Raymond Wacks, Law: A Very Short Introduction (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2008), 23.
12 See Why Eudaimonism Cannot Serve as a Framework for a Theory of Rights, in Wolterstorff, Justice, chap. 7.
13, Richard Posner, The Problem of Jurisprudence (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1990), 228-29.
1% Summarized from Lon Luvois Fuller, The Morality of Law (New Haven, CT: Yale University Pres, 1964, 33-38.
15. John Rawls, A Theory of Justice (Cambridge, MA: Belknap, 2005), 4.
16. Quoted in J. R. Newman, ed., What Is Science? (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1955), 278.
17. Malachi Martin, The Keys of This Blood (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1990), 656.
18. Quoted in John Tabin. "Tustice Ginsburg to Egypt: Don't Look to the US Constitution as a Model," Spectacle Blo
February 2, 2012, http://spectator.org/blog/2012/02/02/justice-ginsburg-to-egypt-dont.
19. Quoted in Richard Hertz, Chance and Symbol (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1948), 107. See also Albert W
Alschuler, Law without Values: The Life, Work, and Legacy of Justice Holmes (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000
Holmes admitted his decisions were based on the fact that humanity is an evolving animal and that the concept of
survival of the fittest was important to him. To some, this justifies a legal focus on animal rights. Morris B. Store
says, "What is there that's different about a human being that dictates the right to life for all humans (unarguably
in most circumstances) where most people acknowledge no such right in other animals? That justifles equal righ
o liberty where we fence the others in, equal justice under law where the other animals are not granted any trial at
all. Morris B. Storer, ed., Humanist Ethics (Buffalo, NY: Prometheus Books, 1980), 29.
20. Quoted in Raymond Wacks, Law, 24.
4. Bradley C. S. Watson, "Republics of Conscience " National Review 64, no. 21 (October 29, 2012): 37
22. Delos MeKown, "Demythologizing Natural Human Rights," Humanist (November/December 1989): 22
23. Paul Kurtz, Forbidden Fruit (Buffalo, NY: Prometheus Books, 1988), 196.
24. Paul Kurtz, The Fullness of Life (Buffalo, NY: Prometheus Books, 1988), 162


<!-- page-13 -->

25. Leslie Green, Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, January 3, cous, sv Legal rositivism," http://plato.stanford
.edu/entries/legal-positivism/.
26. Quoted in Storer, ed., Humanist Ethics, 137.
27. Roscoe Pound, An Introduction to the Philosophy of Law (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1969), 3.
28. Robert Bork, speech to the Council on National Policy (Washington, DC, May 13, 2006).
29. V. 1. Lenin, On Socialist ideology and Culture (Moscow: Foreign Languages Publishing House, 198l), 51-52, quoted in
James D. Bales, Communism and the Reality of Moral Law (Nutley, NJ: Craig Press, 1969), 2.
30. Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, Manifesto of the Communist Party (Chicago: Charles H. Kerr, 1906), 39.
31. L. S. Jawitsch, The General Theory of Law (Moscow: Progress Publishers, 1981), 160.
32. Friedrich Engels, The Origin of the Family, Private Property, and the State (Chicago: Kerr, 1902), 206.
33. V.I. Lenin, The State and Revolution (New York: International Publishers, 1932), 9.
34. Jawitsch, General Theory of Law, 160.
35. Howard Selsam, Socialism and Ethics (New York: International Publishers, 1943), 13.
36. E. B. Pashukanis in a speech regarding the Soviet state and the revolution of law (Moscow, 1930).
37. Jawitsch, General Theory of Law, 290.
38. Lenin, Collected Works (Moscow: Progress Publishers, 1981), 25:155, quoted in John Hazard, Settling Disputes in Soviet
Society (New York: Columbia University Press, 1960), 3.
39. V. I. Lenin, Collected Works, 28:236.
40. Wacks says, "Marxists, for example, have long rejected the very idea that the law can be a neutral body of rules
which guarantees liberty and legality. They spurn, in short, the ideal of the rule of law." Wacks, Law, 150.
41. Andrey Y. Vyshinsky, Judiciary of the USSR, 2nd ed. (Moscow: Progress Publishers, 1935), 32, quoted in Berman,
Justice in the USSR: An Interpretation of Soviet Law (New York: Vintage, 1963), 42-43.
42. Orwell, Animal Farm, 80.
43. John Plamenatz, Man and Society, 2 vols. (London: Longmans, 1963), 2:374, quoted in R. W. Makepeace, Marist
Ideology and Soviet Criminal Law (Totowa, NJ: Barnes and Noble, 1980), 35.
44. As we noted earlier in this volume, R. J. Rummel demonstrates that more human beings in the twentieth-century
died at the hands of their governments, committed to Marxist or fascist ideology, than in all previous centuries
combined. See Death by Government (New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction, 1994).
45. See full text of Sonya Sotomayor's 2001 lecture at "Lecture: A Latina Judge's Voice," New York Times, May 14, 2009,
www.nytimes.com/2009/05/15/us/politics/15judge.text.html?pagewanted=all&r=0.
46. "Lecture: A Latina Judge's Voice."
47. For a compelling narrative of this example, see John Stonestreet's November 17, 2009, lecture on Postmodernism
at www.summit.org/resources/summit-lecture-series/postmodernism-1/.
48. Farber and Sherry, Beyond All Reason, 5.
49. Farber and Sherry, Beyond All Reason, 19.
50. Farber and Sherry, Beyond All Reason, 21.
51. Farber and Sherry, Beyond All Reason, 24.
52. Quoted in Farber and Sherry, Beyond All Reason, 23.
53. Quoted in Dennis McCallum, ed., The Death of Truth (Minneapolis: Bethany House, 1996), 170. See Stanley Fish,
There's No Such Thing as Free Speech: And It's a Good Thing, Too (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1993).
54. "Lecture: A Latina Judge's Voice."
55. Farber and Sherry, Beyond All Reason, 30.
56. "Lecture: A Latina Judge's Voice."
57. Quoted in Stuart Taylor Jr. and K. C. Johnson, Until Proven Innocent (New York: St. Martin's, 2008), 145-46.
58. Farber and Sherry, Beyond All Reason, 39.
59. Quoted in McCallum, Death of Truth, 175.
60. Marianne Williamson, A Return to Love (New York: HarperCollins, 1989), 37.
61. Shakti Gawain, Living in the Light (San Rafael, CA: New World Library, 1986), 110.
62. Gawain, Living in the Light, 37.
63. Gawain, Living in the Light, 3.
64. David Spangler, Revelation: The Birth of a New Age (Middleton, WI: Lorain Press, 1976), 65.
65. Quoted in Shirley MacLaine, Out on a Limb (New York: Bantam Books, 1989), 204.
66. Eckhart Tolle, A New Earth (New York: Plume, 2005), 163.
67. Mark Satin, New Age Politics (New York: Dell, 1978), 103.
68. Joseph Campbell, The Power of Myth (New York: Doubleday, 1988), 118.
69. Campbell, The Power of Myth.
70. Arch Puddington, Freedom in the World 2013: Democratic Breakthroughs in the Balance (Washington, DC: Freedom
House, 2013), www.freedomhouse.org/sites/default/files/FIW/202013%20Booklet%20-20for%20Web_0.pdf.
T2. Bostom, Sharia versus Freedom, 73.
11. Outed in Andrew Bostom, Sharia versus Freedom (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2012), 44.
73. Malise Ruthven, Islar: A Very Short Introduction (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1997), 86.
14. Additionally, Ruthven observes, "by defining correct behavior or orthopraxy at the social level, the Shari'ah has
accordance with local custom. Ruthen, Islam, 86.
left its distinctive imprint on a way or living that has evolved over time and varies from one country to another in
75. Ruthven, Islam.
76. (1) Commanded (such as the five pillars and jihad-disobedience is punished in this life and the next, and
obedience is rewarded in the next life); (2) forbidden (such as thievery and drinking wine-engaging in them is
worthy of punishment in this life and the next, and avolding them is worthy reward in paradise); (3) disapproved
(such as divorce-acts that are discouraged, the avoidance of which may be worthy of reward in paradise): (4
recommended (such as extra charitable acts-acts that are commended on Earth anu rewarded in paradise); (5
indifferent (without positive or negative consequences).
17. Hava C. Cuney-Ruebenacker, "Slamic Law: An Ever-Evolving Science under the Light of Divine Revelation and
Human Reason, www.averroes-foundation.org/articles/islamic_law_evolving.html.
78. In his more than seven-hundred-page book Sharia versus Freedom, Andrew Bostom documents these facts from
hundreds of Islamic sources and demonstrates conclusively the overwhelming acceptance and support of these
provisions-and more among the world's Muslims.
19. Paul I. Williams, Grescent Moon Rising (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2013), 25-26.
80. Mohamed Akram, "An Explanatory Memorandum on the General Strategic Goal for the Group in North America,"
May 22, 1991, 7. This memorandum was found in 2004 during a search of the home of Ismael Elbarasse, one of the
Muslim Brotherhood's representatives in the United States. It was entered into evidence in the July 2007 trial of
seven leaders of the Holy Land Foundation for Relief and Development (HLF). The defendants stood accused of
providing material support and resources to a foreign terrorist organization (Hamas). The trial ended in a mistrial.
A subsequent 2008 trial obtained convictions and life sentences against HLF founders Ghassan Elashi, former CEO
Shukri Abu-Baker, Mufid Abdulqader, Abdulrahman Odeh, and Mohammad El-Mezain.
8l. Lord Acton, letter to Bishop Mandell Creighton (1887). See John Bartlett, Familiar Quotations, 13th and centennial
ed. (Boston: Little, Brown 1955), 335.
82. Ruthven, Islam, 90.
83. Puddington, Freedom in the World 2013.
84. Samuel Shahid, "Rights of Non-Muslims in an Islamic State," Answering Islam, accessed March 27, 2014,
www.answering-islam.org/NonMuslims/rights.htm.
85. The full statement reads, "After having overcome fascism, Nazism, and Stalinism, the world now faces a new
global totalitarian threat: Islamism. We-writers, journalists and public intellectuals call for resistance to religious
totalitarianism. 1) Instead, we call for the promotion of freedom, equal opportunity and secular values worldwide.
(2) The necessity of these universal values has been revealed by events since the publication of the Muhammad
drawings in European newspapers. This struggle will not be won by arms, but in the arena of ideas. What we are
witnessing is not a clash of civilizations, nor an antagonism of West versus East, but a global strugle between
democrats and theocrats. (3) Like all totalitarianisms, Islamism is nurtured by fears and frustrations. The preachers
orate bet on these feelings in order to form battalions destined to impose a word of inequalty. But we clatty
and firmly state: nothing, not even despair, justifies the choice of obscurantism, totalitarianism and hatred. (4
Islamism is a reactionary ideology which kills equality, freedom and secularism wherever it is present. Its succes
an only lead to a world of greater power imbalances: man's domination of woman, the Islamists' dominatio
of all others. (5) To counter this, we must assure universal rights to oppressed people. For that reason, we rejec
cultural relativism' which consists of accepting that Muslim men and women should be deprived of their right t
equality and freedom in the name of their cultural traditions. (6) We refuse to renounce our critical spirit out o
fear of being accused of 'Islamonhobia, an unfortunate concent that confuses criticism of Islamic practices with th
stigmatization of Muslims themselves. (7) We nlead for the universality of free expression, so that a critical spirit may
be exercised on every continent, against every abuse and dogma. (8) We appeal to democrats and free spirits of al
countries that our century should be one of enlightenment, not of obscurantism." Signed by Ayaan Hirsi Ali, Chahl
Chaflq, Caroline Fourest, Bernard-Henri Levy, Irshad Manji, Mehdi Mozaffari, Maryam Namazie, Taslima Nasreen
York: Free Press, 2011), 144-45.
Salman Rushdie, Antoine Sfeir, Philippe Val, and Ibn Warrag; quoted in Irshad Manji, Allah, Liberty, and Love (New
86. To view Freedom House's "Map of Freedom" for the current year, go to www.freedomhouse.org/reports
87. Carl F. H. Henry, Twilisht of a Great Civilization (Westchester, IL: Crossway Books, 1988), 147
88. Second Chronicles 20:6: "Jehoshaphat] said, O LORD, the God of our ancestors, are you not God in heaven
o you not rule over all the kingdoms of the nations? In your hand are power and might, so that none is able
to withstand you"; Acts 17:24-31 (kjv): "God that made the world and all things therein, seeing that he is Lord o


<!-- page-14 -->

heaven and earth, dwelleth not in temples made with hands; neitner is worsnipped with men's nands, as though he
needed any thing, seeing he giveth to all life, and breath, and all things and hath made of one blood al nations of
men to dwell on all the face of the earth, and hath determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of their
habitation: that they should seek the Lord, it haply they might feel after him, and find him, though he be not far
from every one of us: for in him we live, and move, and have our being; as certain also of your own poets have said,
For we are also his offspring. Forasmuch then as we are the offspring of God, we ought not to think that the Godhead
is like unto gold, or silver, or stone, graven by art and man's device. And the times of this ignorance God winked at;
but now commandeth all men every where to repent: because he hath appointed a day, in the which he will judge
the world in righteousness by that man whom he hath ordained; whereof he hath given assurance unto all men, in
that he hath raised him from the dead."
89. Russell Kirk, "The Christian Postulates of English and American Law, Journal of Christian Jurisprudence (1980): 66.
90. Francis Schaeffer, The Complete Works of Francis A. Schaeffer: A Christian Worldview, 5 vols. (Westchester, IL: Crossway
Books, 1982), 2:249.
91. Genesis 9:6: "Whoever sheds the blood of man, by man shall his blood be shed, for God made man in his own
image"; Romans 13: "Let every person be subject to the governing authorities. For there is no authority except from
God, and those that exist have been instituted by God. Therefore whoever resists the authorities resists what God
has appointed, and those who resist will incur judgment. For rulers are not a terror to good conduct, but to bad.
Would you have no fear of the one who is in authority? Then do what is good, and you will receive his approval,
for he is God's servant for your good. But if you do wrong, be afraid, for he does not bear the sword in vain. For
he is the servant of God, an avenger who carries out God's wrath on the wrongdoer. Therefore one must be in
subjection, not only to avoid God's wrath but also for the sake of conscience. For because of this you also pay taxes,
for the authorities are ministers of God, attending to this very thing. Pay to all what is owed to them: taxes to whom
taxes are owed, revenue to whom revenue is owed, respect to whom respect is owed, honor to whom honor is
owed. Owe no one anything, except to love each other, for the one who loves another has fulfilled the law. For the
commandments, 'You shall not commit adultery, You shall not murder, You shall not steal, You shall not covet,
and any other commandment, are summed up in this word: You shall love your neighbor as yourself! Love does
no wrong to a neighbor; therefore love is the fulfilling of the law. Besides this you know the time, that the hour has
come for you to wake from sleep. For salvation is nearer to us now than when we first believed. The night is far gone;
the day is at hand. So then let us cast off the works of darkness and put on the armor of light. Let us walk properly
as in the daytime, not in orgies and drunkenness, not in sexual immorality and sensuality, not in quarreling and
jealousy. But put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no provision for the flesh, to gratify its desires."
92. Acts 14:8-18: "Now at Lystra there was a man sitting who could not use his feet. He was crippled from birth and
had never walked. He listened to Paul speaking. And Paul, looking intently at him and seeing that he had faith to
be made well, said in a loud voice, 'Stand upright on your feet! And he sprang up and began walking. And when
the crowds saw what Paul had done, they lifted up their voices, saying in Lycaonian, The gods have come down to
us in the likeness of men! Barnabas they called Zeus, and Paul, Hermes, because he was the chief speaker. And the
priest of Zeus, whose temple was at the entrance to the city, brought oxen and garlands to the gates and wanted
to offer sacrifice with the crowds. But when the apostles Barnabas and Paul heard of it, they tore their garments
and rushed out into the crowd, crying out, Men, why are you doing these things? We also are men, of like nature
with you, and we bring you good news, that you should turn from these vain things to a living God, who made the
heaven and the earth and the sea and all that is in them. In past generations he allowed all the nations to walk in
their own ways. Yet he did not leave himself without witness, for he did good by giving you rains from heaven and
fruitful seasons, satisfying your hearts with food and gladness Even with these words they sarcely restrained the
people from offering sacrifice to them"; James 5:1-6: "Come now, you rich, weep and howl for the miseries that are
coming upon you. Your riches have rotted and your garments are moth-eaten. Your gold and silver have corroded,
and their corrosion will be evidence against you and will eat your flesh like fire. You have laid up treasure in the last
day, Behold, the wages of the laborers who mowed your fields, which you kept back by fraud, are crying out against
you, and the cries of the harvesters have reached the ears of the Lord of hosts. You have lived on the earth in luxury
and in self-indulgence. You have fattened your hearts in a day of slaughter. You have condemned and murdered the
righteous person. He does not resist you."
93. Johner 4: " The Word became flesh and dwelt among us, and we have seen his glory, glory as of the only son from
the Father, full of grace and truth."
94. Acts 17:31: "[God) has fixed a day on which he will judge the world in righteousness by a man whom he has
appointed; and of this he has given assurance to all by raising him from the dead; Romans 2:16: "On that day..™
according to my gospel, God [will] judge the secrets of men by Christ Jesus"; 2 Corinthians 5:10: "We must all appear
before the judgment seat of Christ, so that each one may receive what is due for what he has done in the body
whether good or evil"
95. John W. Whitehead, The Second American Revolution (Westchester, IL: Crossway Books, 1988), 80.
96. John Eidsmoe says of general and special revelation, "Upon these two foundations, the law of nature and the
law of revelation [the Bible], depend all human laws." John Eidsmoe, Uhnstianity and the Constitution (Grand Rapids:
97. ohn Warwick Montgomery, The Law above the Law Minneapolis: Dimension Books, 1975), 26
g8. Romans 1:26-32: "For this reason God gave them up to dishonorable passions. For their women exchange
natural relations for those that are contrary to nature; and the men Ilkewise save up natura relations with womer
and were consumed with passion for one another, men committing shameless acts with men and receiving in
themselves the due penalty for their error. And since they did not see fit to acknowledge God, God gave them up
to a debased mind to do what ought not to be done. They were Illled with all manner of unrighteousness, evi
covetousness, malice. They are full of envy, murder, strife, deceit, malciousness. Iney are gossips, slanderer
haters of God, insolent, haughty, boastful, inventors of evil, disobedient to parents, foolish, faithless, heartless
but give approval to those who practice them."
ruthless. Though they know God's decree that those who practice such things deserve to die, they not only do them
99. William Blackstone, Commentaries on the Laws of England, in Commentaries with Notes of Reference to the Constitution
ond Laus of the Federal Government of the United States and of the Commonwealth of Virginia, 5 vols., ed. St. George Tucker
(Philadelphia: William Young Birch and Abraham Small, 1803; repr., South Hackensack, NJ: Rothman Reprints,
1969), 1:38-39.
100. Noah Webster, History of the United States: To Which Is Prefixed a Brief Historical Account of Our English Ancestors, from
the Dispersion at Babel, to Their Migration to America, and of the Conquest of South America, by the Spaniards (New Haven:
Durrie and Peck, 1832), 339.
101. Noah Webster, Value of the Bible and Excellence of the Christian Religion for Use of Families and Schools (New Haven:
Durrie and Peck, 1834), 175-76.
102. Thomas Jefferson, The Works of Thomas Jefferson, comp. and ed. Paul L. Ford (New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1894),
103. Gary T. Amos, Defending the Declaration (Brentwood, TN: Wolgemuth and Hyatt, 1989), 117.
