# Chapter 16

<!-- page-1 (book p.16) -->

CHAPTER
1. ECONOMICS AND THE DARK KNIGHT RISES
Dr. Jonathan Crane, aka "The Scarecrow," is a psychopath
who lives to create fear. In The Dark Knight Rises, Crane relishes
sentencing Gotham's leaders to death or exile by crossing a
partially frozen river, where they will fall through and drown.
Exile means death. Just before Batman rides to the rescue,
Commissioner Gordon is brought before the court:
Gordon: No lawyer, no witnesses? What sort of due process is
this?
Crane: Your guilt has been determined. This is merely a sentenc-
ing hearing. Now, what will it be? Death or Exile?
Gordon: Crane, if you think were going to walk out on that ice
willingly, you got another thing coming!


<!-- page-2 -->

Crane: So it's death then?
Gordon: Looks that way.
Crane: Very well. Death! [Smashes gavel] By exile!
The Dark Knight Rises is a modern-day retelling of Charles Dickens's novel A Tale of
Two Cities, set during the French Revolution. Commissioner Gordon even quotes Dickens's
sacrificial hero, Sydney carton, in his eulogy for Batman: It is a tar, tar better thing that
I do, than I have ever done; it is a far, far better rest that I go to, than I have ever known"
At first, the film seems to endorse revolution. It pictures the elite enjoying frivolous
parties while the poor suffer miserably in the sewers. Selina Kyle (aka Catwoman), a jewel
thief with a Robin Hood flair, expresses the resentment: "There's a storm coming, Mr. Wayne.
You and your friends better batten down the hatches, because when it hits, you're all gonna
wonder how you ever thought you could live so large and leave so little for the rest of us
When the storm does come, Kyle-along with everyone else—realizes she has believed lies
about how to fix society. It takes more than resentment, revenge, and revolution to improve
life. This isn't just a story about Batman; it's a story about economics.
Today we live in an era of greater and more widespread prosperity than ever before in
history. It didn't happen by accident. Is it possible to maintain this prosperity? Is it possible
to expand it to free even more people to become the kinds of stewards of creation God de-
signed them to be? To answer these questions, we must understand the fascinating and often
complicated discipline of economics.
2. WHY ECONOMICS MATTERS
In Latin, the word for "economics" comes from the Greek word oikonomos, which means
"the art of running a household." Economists don't run households per se, but they do
study institutions and human beings, especially how they compete, cooperate, and distribute
goods, services, and information. From the sale of groceries to the capitalization of multi-bil-
lion-dollar building projects, economists try to figure out why some economies produce
wealth and others are impoverished. They look at the
Economics: the study of the
management of resources.
role society's institutions play, especially government,
businesses, voluntary associations, and human institu-
tions like families. Beyond investigating the nature of
such things, economists are often called upon to give
their opinions about what policies ought to be pursued. US presidents, for instance, have a
small army of "economic advisors"
At its most basic level, economics is about scarcity: resources (time, materials, money)
are limited, so we must make choices. If there were no scarcity, there would be no need for
the study of economics. How families and businesses and governments make choices in the
midst of scarcity determines their own economic situations, and it affects their country's
economic situation as well. One of the most profound biblical truths for economics appears a
the very beginning, in Genesis 1, when God told human beings to be "fruitful and multip
"fill the earth," and rule over creation (Gen. 1:28).4 It is as if God looked at his creation and
proclaimed, "Be abundant!" God enjoys a world teeming with life, purpose, and creativity.
Because of sin, though, we nave death, aimlessness, and plodding predictability instead
One of sins most paintul cheysequences is poverty. In the time of Christ and throughout
most of human history, everyone was poor, certainly by
modern standards. In fact, even the wealthy were poor
by today's standards. According to economist Angus
One of the most profound
Maddison, the average person two thousand years ago,
in today's dollars, made about a dollar a day, the World
economics appears at
Bank's definition of extreme poverty. Poverty exacts a
the very beginning.
heavy emotional and spiritual toll, but its most costly
effect is hopelessness. As Compassion International's Scott Lodd says, the voice of poverty
whispers, "It won't get any better. Just give up? Poverty sweeps away the desire to change
and thereby the ability to effect it.
Widespread poverty reigned well into the eighteenth century. In the world depicted in
Jane Austen's books and their movie adaptations, society settled into a state of haves and
have-nots. As Sylvia Nasar says, "Everybody knew his or her place, and no one questioned
it" Working conditions were deplorable. Starvation was common. Then something changed,
and quickly. Nasar reports,
A mere fifty years after [Austen's] death, that world was altered beyond recognition. It
was not only the "extraordinary advance in wealth, luxury and refinement of taste" or
the unprecedented improvement in the circumstances of those whose condition was
assumed to be irremediable.... It was the sense that the changes were not accidental or
a matter of luck, but the result of human intention, will, and knowledge.
For millennia it was always winter and never Christmas, but then springtime arrived
almost overnight.? Today's US economy is thirty times as big as it was two hundred years ago!
Prosperity is spreading, and people around the world are being rapidly lifted out of poverty.
According to Todd, extreme poverty has dropped in half
just in the last generation, from 52 percent of the world's
population to 26 percent."
How all this happened forms a remarkable story. If
we understand it, we may live to see continued growth
in the health and well-being of people all over the world.
Extreme poverty has
dropped in half just in
the last generation, from
52 percent of the world's
population to 26 percent.
If we don't, we put everything at risk. Even today, with
growing prosperity, many countries are where they were
two hundred years ago, or even worse. What are they missing? Is there hope for them? To
answer these questions, let's take a quick look at what economists know and how they know it
3. ECONOMICS AT A GLANCE
Earlier we defined economics as "the management of a household." But economists actu
ally look at two things: households, the basic units where economic consumption takes place,
and firms, groups of individuals organized to produce goods and services. Economists study
households and firms on two levels: microeconomics, or how households and firms decide


<!-- page-3 (book p.399) -->

to buy and sell goods and services, and macroeconom-
Microeconomics:
the branch of economics
that studies how
households and firms buy,
sell, and allocate resources.
ics, or how the economy as a whole functions: growth,
money, taxation, and so on.
Most nations have something like a free market
economy, in which economic decisions are made by
millions of households and firms rather than by a central
planning authority! Even communist countries-
perhaps with the exception of North Korea-allow
Macroeconomics:
the branch of economics
that studies how large
economies function as
a whole, focusing on
such things as gross
domestic product (GDP),
unemployment, tax rates,
and inflation.
households and firms to buy and sell goods and services
to an extent. It simply would not be possible to exist
otherwise.'
Today economists often articulate the concept of a
market in terms devised by a Scottish philosopher named
Adam Smith. Smith thought people should be free to
accumulate as much capital (goods used to produce
other goods) as they wanted as long as it was acquired
through legal means. Because they would have to serve
other people to get what they wanted for themselves, the
free exchange of goods and services served as a "guiding
Free Market Economy:
an economy in which
economic decisions are
freely made by households
and firms.
hand" in forming a mature, prosperous economy. As
George Gilder points out, Smith's theory sounds selfish,
but it gave economists a way of understanding economic
activity:
It seems preposterous to most people to say that the
way to create a good and bountiful society is to give
maximum freedom to a group of predatory philis-
Capital: goods used to
produce other goods and
services.
tines [but] ... economists could find in Smith's theory
of self-interest an apparently safe and orderly, even
mechanically predictable, core of calculation as the
source of economic growth. 14
thought if people could be free to produce and trade their goods and services, their will-
Jean-Baptiste Say was another early scholar whose economic ideas gained traction. Say
ingness to supply what people wanted would create a demand, and the economy would
grow. Say's law claims that the availability of something
on the market creates a demand equal to its value. In
Say's Law: formulated by
Jean-Baptiste Say, Say's
law is the belief that the
availability of a good or
service creates a demand
equal to its value (i.e.,
product value is a function
of supply and demand).
short, "supply creates demand"s A person who makes
a product is motivated to sell it as quickly as possible
and use his or her earnings to purchase something else.
This basic process, repeated millions of times, creates
economic growth.
But economists don't just study the world as it
is. They also make claims about how it ought to be, 6
Studying the world as it is, ideally, is a descriptive and
empirical task. Studying the world as we think it ought to be is normative and aspirational.
There's nothing wrong with doing both of these things as long as we are clear about what is
happening. Unfortunately, some economists are captive to utopian visions based on wrong
assumptions about God, humans, and the world. As the experiences of communism have
taught us. or should have taught us, the misguided desire to create a heaven on earth will
more than likely create a hell on earth. That's why its
important to ask. "What assumptions are you making
about nature, society, religion, and ethics?"
But even if there is general agreement on how the
world ought to be, the best way to move toward it is to
first discover what the world is really like. Wishing for
there to be less poverty in the world does not automat-
ically mean that our actions will fulfill that goal. Some
policies might help. Some might have no effect. Some
might harm. To determine which actions and policies
Our good intentions
cannot wish away
economic reality. As
always, ideas have
consequences: we need
to be sure our ideas are
based on truth, or else the
consequences could
be devastating.
in the economy are most likely to help, we have to re-
turn to the known facts and theoretical insights about
economic reality. Our good intentions cannot wish away economic reality. As always, ideas
have consequences: we need to be sure our ideas are based on truth, or else the consequences
could be devastating.
Experience has taught economists that several building blocks are necessary for a
well-functioning economy. Let's take a look at five of the most vital and see how our own
country's policies stack up.
4. FIVE BUILDING BLOCKS OF ECONOMIC SUCCESS
Most people around the world would rather have an income than not have one. They
would rather have food than go hungry. They would rather have security than uncertainty.
All of these things, though, require a thriving economy, and desire alone cannot make that
happen. A well-functioning economy is based on time-tested building blocks of success. Here
are five of the most important:
1. The rule oflaw Ifa person think his investment could be swept awav by chaos or by
the whims of a dictator he is unlikelyto take the rick Economic growth requires predictabilit
and stability. When it comes to economics, a poorly functioning government is like a prison
guard keeping people locked up so they can't do bad things. A well-functioning government
is like trafic cop helping the economy flow smoothly.
According to the United States Constitution, one function of the federal government is to
promote the "ceneral welfare" (well_being) of American citizens. People disagree about how
to do this. To some it means ensuring economic efficiency or creating wealth. To others it
explains the difference:
means enforcing economic equity. N. Gregory Mankiw, an economics professor at Harvard
The question of efficiency is whether the pie is as big as possible. The question of equity
is whether the pie is divided fairly. Evaluating the equity of a market outcome is more


<!-- page-4 (book p.401) -->

difficult than evaluating the eficiency. Whereas eficiency is an objective goal that can
be judged on strictly positive grounds, equity involves normative judgments that go
beyond economics and enter into the realm of political philosophy.?
Again, there's nothing wrong with bringing normative or ethical concerns to economic
questions. But when a government tries to divide the pie "fairly, it is presuming to have
knowledge it doesn't have. Its actions run the risk of violating people's rights, stealing their
property, and making things worse, not better. Experience says it may not be desirable or even
possible to use governmental authority to shape or transform society in an economic sense.
For free exchange and economic prosperity, however, one thing government must do
is protect the right to private property, including personal possessions, land, and means of
production. Government must secure the right to intellectual property, including copyrights,
patents, and so forth. This takes a lot of thoughtfulness in today's technological society. How
do you help protect peoples ideas, not just their work or physical property?
Take computers, for example. Computers require software, which, at root, is code-a list
of instructions. What does it mean to own such a thing? This is especially difficult because
software is not bought or sold like groceries. Developers sell permission to use the code. When
you install a new app or program and click the "Agree" box, you agree to borrow or rent the
code but not keep it for yourself. A government without a stable rule of law based on absolute
truth will find it impossible to deal with economic innovations such as these. And without
predictability, innovation grinds to a halt.
2. A strictly limited role of government in the mar-
Without predictability,
innovation grinds to
ketplace. Government's proper role is maintaining the
rule of law, which is needed to set up the conditions for
free exchanges in the economy. But government inter-
vention in the economy often goes far beyond that basic
and legitimate role. Government that oversteps its proper
bounds can actually violate the rule of law. Government should be powerful enough to enforce
the rule of law but not so unlimited in its scope that it violates the rule of law with impunity.
Imagine stepping up to a church bake-sale table to purchase a cupcake and having a
government agent block your way. "I'm sorry, you can't buy your cupcake because this bake
sale does not possess a business license, and our agents have not certified that its foods were
prepared in a properly inspected commercial kitchen? This agent thinks he is protecting you
from possible harm even if you're willing to take the risk. The effect, however, is to destroy
Wise governments try to anticipate the consequences of intervening in an otherwise tree
exchange. That's because the cost of such coercive intervention in market exchanges otten
vastly exceeds the benejits. By scrambling the basic signals of communication in a market,
such intervention can create uncertainty, steal motivation, and slow the economy to a crawl
For instance, a city government may impose price controls on rental housing in order to keep
housing within reach of its poorer citizens. But the effect of such controls will be to create a
shortage in housing-just the opposite of their noble intentions.
In the past, another form of government intervention has been the attempt to equalize
people economically through confiscating wealth and redistributing it. 18 In the 1960s, president
Lyndon Johnson declared a "war on poverty" and committed billions of tax dollars to develop
welfare programs, build housing, and buy food for poor people. Most Americans like the idea
of a social safety net and agree we should help people get back on their feet. But how much
did the kind of intervention represented by the War on
Poverty actually help? In the six years before the War
on Poverty began, poverty had dropped to 15 percent.
After the federal government spent trillions of dollars,
the poverty rate today remains between 12 percent and
15 percent. Jay Richards says somberly, "The statistics
hide the full cost: not only did the War on Poverty fail; it
created economic and social problems worse than those
it was meant to solve."19
Sometimes intervention on behalf of those needing
help can actually hurt them. For example, the federal
Wise governments
try to anticipate the
consequences of
intervening in an
otherwise free exchange.
That's because the cost of
such coercive intervention
in market exchanges often
vastly exceeds the benefits.
government gives several billion dollars in aid to coun
tries in Africa. It also gives several billion dollars a year to American cotton farmers so they
can sell their cotton at about 25 percent below the price on the world market. This subsidy
makes it hard for African countries to sell their cotton profitably? Martin Meredith says,
"The trade losses associated with U.S. farm subsidies that West Africa's eight main cotton
exporters suffered outweighed the benefits they received from U.S. aid! These interventions
cost taxpayers billions of dollars and simultaneouşly hurt the world's poor. It is a legitimate
question to ask how this can possibly be justified.
Creating a social safety net for the poor, widows, and
orphans is a laudable goal, but it does not follow that the
federal government should create or maintain the net.
3. Freedom to pursue ideas. As Cambridge econo-
Sometimes intervention
on behalf of those
needing help can
actually hurt them.
mist Partha Dasgupta says, "Many economists... regard
the production of new ideas as the prime factor behind
economic progress? Good ideas are not inevitable; they arise as people have freedom to
trade and acquire what they want. Jay Richards tells a story of his sixth-grade teacher using
a simple game to demonstrate this. She handed a small gift to each student- a pack of gum,
-and broke the class into five groups of five. She asked them to rate their
satisfaction with their gift on a scale of one to ten and then compiled the scores. Next she
allowed students to trade their gifts with others in their group. The satisfaction score went up
Finally the teacher allowed students to trade with anyone in the class. Students' satisfaction
scores went way up, and not one person's score went down.
What changed? It wasn't the number of gifts or their cost. It was the freedom to trad
for gifts matching their ideas about what they wanted. At root, economics is about mind, not
matter. Dasgupta notes that economies grow "when people acquire knowledge and make use
ofit, or when people make better use of what they know"2 According to economist Michael
Novak, the American founders' understanding of this principle is why they guaranteed in
the Constitution the right to own ideas through copyrights and patents? No wonder most
technological breakthroughs since then have taken place in the United States.


<!-- page-5 -->

Humans are ruled not merely by instinct but by intellect. Freeing people to think
and dream and create is integral to a strong society. bernard Lonergan expresses thi
whimsically:
Deep within us all, emergent when the noise of other appetites is stilled, there is a
drive to know, to understand, to see why, to discover the reason, to find the cause,
to explain... It can absorb a man. It can keep him for hours, day after day, year after
year, in the narrow prison of his study or his laboratory. It can send him on dangerous
voyages of exploration. It can withdraw him from other interests, other pursuits, other
pleasures, other achievements. It can fil his waking thoughts, hide from him the world
of ordinary affairs, invade the very fabric of his dreams. It can demand endless sacrifices
that are made without regret though there is only the hope, never a certain promise, of
success. What better symbol could one find for this obscure, exigent, imperious drive,
than a man [Archimedes], naked, running, excitedly crying, "I've got it"?25
An economy grows best when it accounts for the natural creativity flowing from what
the Bible describes as humans capacity to bear God's image.
4. Participation. Jim Clifton, chairman and CEO of Gallup, argues that people make ten
thousand to twenty thousand small decisions a day. Multiply this by three hundred million
people and 365 days, and you have one quadrillion (a one followed by fifteen zeroes) decisions
being made every year in America alone.2 No central planning agency, even a smart one,
could ever manage or control these decisions.
As we saw earlier, the knowledge to make an economy work is in peoples minds, dispersed
across hundreds of millions of people, not in a computer. They pick up cues and make minute
adjustments without even realizing they are doing so, and the sum total of this mental activity
is greater than any one person can account for. George Gilder explains:
When one moves from this multifarious mass of information to rely on written or
documented learning alone, one reduces total knowledge by a factor of millions, which
is to say, incalculably. But [as economist Jay] Forrester pointed out, when one moves
on from written knowledge to mathematical data-the kind of information that can
be programmed onto a computer—one reduces total knowledge by another factor of
millions, by another astronomical swath. Yet every socialist plan normally begins with
just such a draconian reduction, just such a holocaust of human learning and skills,
leaving only a pile of statistical ashes, a dry and sterile residue of numbers, from which
to reconstruct the edifice of economic activity?
Any economic system attempting to control this process, then, must ignore the fact that
humans are more than physical. We have spirits. We have ideas. We interact with one anothe
spiritually and on the level of ideas. When an economy is relatively free, people's ideas generate
economic stability and prosperity. Much of this activity isn't even in large corporations bu
in what Daniel Pink calls microenterprises-businesses with no emplovees. There are more
than twenty-one million of them in the United States.28
5. Sustainability. Some policies, such as wealth redistribution, may be popular in the
short term but can bankrupt the government and devastate society in the long run. Gov-
program in the United States federal government at the present time—-it sets in motion a
ernment programs are costly. When costs exceed revenue-which is true with nearly ever
vicious cycle in which the government consumes more
and me resources than would otherwise be used to
create economic growth. Unless we have significant-
When an economy is
even exuberant —economic growth, we will never be able
relatively free, people's
ideas generate economic
to generate enough tax revenue even to pay the federal
stability and prosperity.
government's enormous debt, which, at this writing,
totals about eighteen trillion dollars. (This doesn't include the much larger " unfunded liabil-
¡ties" in such programs as Social Security and Medicare.) As George Gilder says, "The fatal
problem of a system without accumulations of personal income and without the possibility
of large profits is not the lack of incentives but the lack of dynamism and flexibility We
need dynamism and flexibility now more than ever to sustain our way of life.
It's wrong to steal. So why do politicians think borrowing money that someone else must
repay in the future is a moral thing to do? Isn't it a form of theft from future generations? As
Dasgupta frames it,
In this reckoning, sustainable development requires that relative to their populations
each generation should bequeath to its successor at least as large a productive base as
it had itself inherited. Notice that the requirement is derived from a relatively weak
notion of intergenerational justice. Sustainable development demands that future
generations have no less of the means to meet their needs that we do ourselves; it
demands nothing more.30
If Dasgupta is right, we not only have a moral obligation to steward our natural resources;
we also have a moral obligation to stand against any economic program that will hurt those
who come after us. "Debt," says Richard Lamm from the Institute for Public Policy Studies
at the University of Denver and the former Democratic governor of Colorado, "is an inter-
generational transfer from our children to the current generation, and they are too young to
complain. There are no lobbyists for the future."31
Eighteen trillion dollars in government debt is a staggering sum. At an income of about
forty million dollars a year, it would take basketball star LeBron James four hundred thou-
sand seasons to earn that much monev. Even the world's richest man would need more that
three hundred lifetimes to earn enough to pay it all. The story of how we got in this mess
is simultaneously embarrassing and enraging. In the early part of the twentieth century, a
British economist named John Maynard Keynes noticed the boom-and-bust cycle in the
free market and thought government could smooth it out by borrowing money to stimulate
demand. This would kick-start the economy, he believed. Keynes went beyond using the
government to help poor people. He thought we should spend money on anything likely to
stimulate demand. The ensuing growth would result in more earnings and thus higher tax
revenue. The government could use this revenue to repay its debt. With government's help,
we could literally spend ourselves into prosperity,
At first it worked. Government stimulated the economy, and the economy came to life.
But each subsequent stimulus was less and less effective. Short-term gain, long-term pain.
Now, although every dollar of government debt produces only about eight cents of economic
value (which means that ninety-two cents has been wasted), the whole amount still must be
paid back with interest. The level of government debt has grown so large it cannot be paid


<!-- page-6 (book p.405) -->

back with the tax revenue the economy generates. Today's leaders will die, but the debt they
incurred will live on and grow larger every year. It is a toxic burden to future generations
that makes a mockery of the idea of sustainability. Here's a chart showing each individual's
share of the national debt in inflation-adjusted dollars:
• 1915-$667
• 1945—$8,767
• 1975$17,617
• 2005—$30,154
• 2011-$47,093
If these trends continue, the share of government debt each of us will be responsible for
will be far greater than we will ever realistically be able to pay. When the bill comes due, the
government will either default on its obligations, setting off a panic and plunging the world
into an economic nightmare, or it will try to print enough
dollars to pay its bills. Adding more printed money into
Adding more printed
money into the economy
decreases the value of all
other dollars.
the economy decreases the value of all other dollars.
Something similar happened to Germany in the 1930s,
when money lost its value so rapidly that a wheelbarrow
full of money-which once could have helped one live
comfortably for years—was no longer even enough to
buy a loaf of bread. The desperation of Germany helps explain why they so eagerly embraced
Adolf Hitler, thus lighting the spark to ignite World War Il and the deaths of tens of millions.
Five fundamentals of economics: the rule of law, limited government, freedom of ideas,
participation, and sustainability. Without these five factors, economies function poorly and
hurt people in the process. With this backdrop, let's examine each of our six worldviews to see
how they meet the tests of economic truth.
5. SECULARISM
Karl Marx defined capitalism as a market-directed economy based on the private
ownership of goods and resources? I's a term with an odd lineage, and using it as Marx
did limits its meaning. (In fact, no one defends capi-
Capitalism: an economic
system in which capital
assets are privately owned,
and the prices, production,
and distribution of
goods and services are
determined by competition
within a free market.
talism as Marx defined it.) Capitalism, however, also
means the freedom to exchange goods and services
as people see fit. In this sense, it is a synonym for a
free market economy or free enterprise. On the other
hand, socialism refers to an economic system in which
citizens forfeit property rights in exchange for a central
planning authority that attempts to provide economic
stability. The state owns property and the means of
production." In practice, most economies are a mixture
fboth-they allow free exchange but also require of
citizens the support of central planning in many areas
Historically, Secularists have embraced socialism,
and for three reasons:
1. Secularists believed socialism was the key to
future human development. Early Secularists were
not bothered by the idea of government coercion being
used to accomplish socialist goals, because big problems
Socialism: an economic
system based on
governmental or
communal ownership of
the means of production
and distribution of
goods and services.
needed a big solution. Erich Fromm once again: "The
aim of socialism is an association in which the full development of each is the condition for
the full development of all."34
2. Secularists believed socialism was more democratic. Secularists chose socialism
because of the evils they saw as inherent in capitalism. Fromm explained: "The giant cor-
porations which control the economic—and to a large degree the political destiny of the
country, constitute the very opposite of the democratic process; they represent power without
control by those submitted to it?"35
3. Secularists believed socialism stopped exploitation. Corliss Lamont embraced so-
cialism because of the "tremendous waste inherent in the capitalist system and its wanton
exploitation of men and natural resources? To Lamont's way of thinking, those who think
otherwise are not freedom lovers but fascists: "Since fascism is simply capitalism stripped of all
democratic pretenses and other unessentials-capitalism
in the nude, as it were-the danger of fascism remains
as long as the capitalist system is with us."37
The most influential people who shaped Secularist
thought in the last century were socialists. Given Secu-
larism's assumptions, we can see why. Socialism makes
The most influential
people who shaped
Secularist thought
in the last century
were socialists.
sense to those who believe humans are inherently good
and smart enough to develop a good society without
divine guidance. Erich Fromm was tv sical in his sentiment: "We socialists are not ashamed
to confess that we have a deep faith in man and in a vision of a new, human form of society"
Today, though, many Secularists siduaway from identifying themselves as socialists. For
some it is because of the glaring inefficiened s and oppressions they saw in socialist regimes
It is hard to see the havoc socialism viduaaked in the former Soviet Union, China, Cuba, Nort
Korea, and a host ofother Asian, Lerin American, South American, and African countries and
still be a cheerleader for it. Socialisn has failed in every case to cure human tallenness—to
create the "new socialist man" — and to lift people out of poverty.
Todav many Secularists remain socialist, but others are more nuanced. Some Secularists
insist that they cannot be labeled in "old" categories, such as capitalism or socialism. They
prefer new expressions, such as the "politics of meaning," which, according to Jonah Goldberg,
refers to orienting all of society's institutions, including economics, around the state. Such an
"intelligently plural economy, according to John Kenneth Galbraith, would of course involve
he public ownership of certain industries."9


<!-- page-7 -->

We refer to this new-and-improvedmind of socialism as economic interventionism,
belief that a strong program of government intervention is necessary to curb the free marke
and make a better society. Why the criticism of the tree market? It people have the freedom
to choose, they sometimes choosoop 07y. They might even start seeing their value in purely
economic terms, devaluing themselves amidwoors. Erich Fromm said, "What is modern man's
relationship to his fellow man? It is one between two abstractions, two living machines, who
use each other? To Fromm, the only way to avoid this is through a "fundamental reorgani-
zation of our economic and social system."!
As you will recall, Secularists believe only matter exists. Every problem and every solu-
tion is materialistic. Equality, whatever it is, must be some material quantity, such as income
or purchasing power. Thus, Secularists who embrace economic interventionism consider
financial poverty—not spiritual poverty, relational poverty, or a poverty of ideas-to be the
best measure of equality. As we saw in the "Secularism" chapter, Secularists believe people are
basically good but have been made bad by society. Poor people are poor because rich people
have taken away their resources. If this can be equalized, poor people will become productive
and society will improve. Crime and other anti-social behavior will decrease.
So what is the solution? Interventionists believe smart, pure leaders will be able to discern
what is best and make decisions for the good of all. Such leaders may restrict freedom, yes,
but Secularists believe it is okay because they only have everyone's best interests at heart. To
John Dewey, this is a very moral thing to do: "Social control of economic forces is ... necessary
if anything approaching economic equality and liberty is to be realized."42
To Jonah Goldberg, the idea that the state is the answer is "ultimately a theocratic
doctrine because it seeks to answer the fundamental questions about existence, argues that
they can only be answered collectively, and insists that the state put those answers into
practice™ If no God exists, the state is the most powerful thing and ought to be worshipped.
A minority of Secularists, though, go in precisely the opposite direction of economic
interventionism. A few, like the twentieth-century Ayn Rand, defended capitalism as the only
just economic system. She thought the only proper end for individuals was to pursue their
self interests. She even referred to selfishness as a virtue. Much of her thought is popular
today among a group of people who refer to themselves as libertarians.
Libertarianism is in many ways the exact opposite of interventionism. Interventionism
says the state can produce a good society. Libertarianism believes that only individuals with
complete liberty trom state interferen asto do so. Both are utopian of a sort-one trusts
the state to be "god"; the other gives that responsibility to individuals. If Secularismis un-
derlying assumptions about God, the world, and the moral state of human beings are true,
then utopian solutions are very attractive, whether they involve elites making decisions to
everyone else or believing that society Will be better if everyone pursues their own interests
6. MARXISM
Just as a piranha can't help biting, capitalism (that is, a market-oriented economy
can't help exploiting. Karl Marx thought this for two reasons. First, he thought the bour
geoisie-the business owners-clouoake their profits only by paying workers less than
what they were worth and getting them to work harder than necessary to produce a good
or service the business owners could sell for more than
it was worth (what it cost to produce). Only in this way
the owner become wealthy. The more capitalism
suceds, Marx believed, the worse the problem gets:
"Accumulation of wealth at one pole is, therefore, at
the same time accumulation of misery, agony of toil,
slavery, ignorance, brutality, mental degradation, at
the opposite pole." Marx's view is called the surplus
value theory of labor. He referred to profit, then, as
Surplus Value Theory of
Labor: According to Karl
Marx, the value of a good
or service should be equal
to the average number
of labor hours required
to produce the good or
service. This implies that
setting prices above this
The second flaw inherent in capitalism, Marx
cost leads to a situation
thought, is its chaotic nature. With socialism, the state
in which the bourgeoisie
controls everything in a rational and orderly way, from
amass wealth at the
production to distribution. In a capitalistic system,
expense of the proletariat.
economic decisions are made by every producer and
consumer, such as store owners, farmers, and moms
with shopping lists. This purportedly makes capitalism
Surplus Value: according to
spontaneous, erratic, freewheeling, uncontrollable, and,
Karl Marx, surplus value is
to Marx, dangerous. In fact, he believed capitalists keep
the value of a commodity
the economy unstable on purpose to give the bourgeoisie
or service that exceeds the
more power. This could be solved, Marx thought, by
cost of labor; i.e., profit.
having the state take over all decisions related to pro-
duction and distribution.
Most economists now believe Marx was wrong, and tragically so. He had a profound
worldview problem. As a materialist and naturalist, Marx did not believe that human beings
were made in the image of the creative God, or that, as a result, human beings could create
new wealth by their economic activity. He didn't believe humanity possessed a "God-given"
anything; humans were just "matter in motion." As George Gilder phrased it, "Marx... erro-
neously located the means of production in the material arrangements of the society rather
than in the metaphysical capital of human freedom and creativity Creativity, hard work,
innovation, problem-solving abilitv, tekem-building skills, successful cooperation, efficiency,
persuasion, service, opportunity, entre resleurial risk, and ventures—-all of these are eco-
nomic resources as well. They're like ab tha thy lifestyle of nutrition and exercise that creates
opportunities for growth and generales hopefulness and initiative. Because of Marx's stunted
view of what it means to be human, though, his economic philosophy was destined to remain
puny and Eeyore-like.
Part of the capitalist critique of Marxism is its hostile attitude toward private property.
But if people can't control their property--their possessions, their ideas, their skills they
will have no incentive to produce eedovernmental coercion carries a very high cost and very
few benefits. But Marxists shoot back that doing nothing is worse. Capitalism is a ticking
ime bomb that will bring about its own destruction. Engels said,


<!-- page-8 (book p.409) -->

penalty of its own destruction, is forced to accomplish this revolution. [Eventually] the
Droletariat seizes political power and turns the means of production into state property. 16
Cooper or later the proletariat will be fed up with their treatment and demand the de.
struction of the system that demeaned them. According to Raymond Sleeper, "The system of
exploitations does not disappear of itself. It is destroyed only as the result of the revolutionary
struggle and the victory of the proletariat."47
Of course, this transition would not happen all at once. Capitalism does at least produce
thing, and Marxists wanted to wait to destroy it until, according to Engels, "the necesary
quantity of the means of production has been created.*8 This is ironic. Marx and Engels
recognized that capitalist societies created wealth even as their theory denied it in the rela-
tion between business owners and workers. In the end, they believed, they could do better.
Under communism, "Private ownership will automatically have ceased to exist, money will
have become superfluous, and production will have so
increased and men will be so much changed that the
last forms of the old social relations will also be able to
Secularists see socialism
as a middle ground
between capitalism and
communism, Marxists see
socialism as the gateway to
communism.
Whereas many Secularists see socialism as a middle
ground between capitalism and communism, Marxists
see socialism as the gateway to communism. Lenin said,
"Theoretically, there can be no doubt that between cap-
italism and communism there lies a definite transition
period which must combine the features and properties
of both these forms of social economy"s This is why Secularists who advocate socialism are
sometimes suspected of being Marxists hiding their true intentions.
As we noted earlier, the goal of Marxism is to move toward worldwide communism,
which leads in turn to communist utopia. The text Political Economy explains:
Once the exploiting classes with their parasitic consumption have been abolished, the
national income becomes wholly at the disposal of the people. Working conditions
are radically altered, housing conditions in town and country substantially improved
and all the achievements of modern culture made accessible to the working people."
This is the Marxist version of paradise. The evils of capitalism will have been removed,
humanity will have achieved perfection, and government will have ceased to exist. In short,
Marxists believe communism is the ideal economic system and the foundation for utopia
in all aspects of society. Kenneth Neill Cameron explained: "Marx and Engels expected that
communist society would be the last form of human society, for once the world's productive
forces were communally owned no other form could arise"52
What if something goes wrong? It mustn't! Perfection is part of the plan. Scarcity some
how ceases to exist. Everyone will have a job, Sleeper enthuses, because it will be written into
Can capitalist society with its chronic unemployment ensure each citizen the opportu
nity to work, let alone to choose the work he likes? Clearlv, it cannot. But the socialis
system makes the right to work a constitutional right of a citizen, delivering him from
the oppressive anxiety and uncertainty over the morrow.
It will be this way because communists want it to be. Lenin said, "Outside of socialism,
there is no salvation for mankind from war, hunger and the further destruction of millions
and millions of human beings"54 War. Hunger. Destruction of millions. But which economic
worldview has most frequently underwritten socialism?
system, historically, is most guilty of producing those results? Clearly socialism. And which
7. POSTMODERNISM
It is hard to tell what Postmodernists think about economics. They avoid using terms
with which all economists are familiar, such as wages, pensions, interest rates, inflation, Social
Security, and retirement. Instead, they use words most people find obscure, like fragmen-
tation, differentiation, chronology, pastiche, anti-foundationalism, and pluralism. If those
arent enough, David Ruccio and Jack Amariglio, two professors fascinated with Marxism
and Postmodernism, also add to their list "the undecidability of meaning, the textuality of
discursivity of knowledge, the inconceivability of pure presence, the irrelevance of intention,
the insuperability of authenticity, the impossibility of representation, the celebration of play,
difference, plurality, chance, inconsequence, and marginality?55
In addition to these arcane ideas, one concept seems to be at the heart of postmodern
economics: the decentered self.5 Decentering usually refers to a person who stops seeing
him- or herself as the center of reality. To Postmodern-
ists, though, the decentered self is a self with no core.
Humans are social constructions, fictional stories we tell
ourselves or have heard from others—or worse, fictions
we have come to believe. There is no unified, rational
being underlying who we are. Of course, these stories
do not correspond to anything objective or eternal. If
Decentered Self:
the belief that human
beings are social
constructions without
any singular identifiable
essence, nature, or soul.
they are true in any sense, it is because we find them
persuasive, not because they are ultimately and finally
true. The decentered self is at odds with the notion of a person who has inherent value and
is capable of stewarding economic resources. Thus the Postmodernist tools for explaining
and reproducing economic success are severely limited.
Further. Postmodernists find the very idea of humans having an actual nature given to
them by God as the source of the iniustice in the world, Gender is just one example. The idea
ofa difference between men and women has been "inculcated by an oppressive patriarcha
society"s Only when we recognize the fictions created by our gender constructions can
we overcome the economic oppression those fictions
reinforce.
In some ways
Marxism's failure. 5 Michel Foucault, for example, reacted
In some ways Postmodernism began as a response to
Postmodernism began
as a response to
against "the purely economic and State-centered focus
Marxism's failure.
lof socialism and nationalism| ... stressing that power


<!-- page-9 -->

needs to be reconceptualized and the role of the State, and the function of the economic, need a
radical revisioning"s Toward the end of his lite, Foucault even began encouraging his students
to read Friedrich A. Hayek and Ludwig von Mises, two economists suspicious of anything
hampering free markets. Perhaps his vision was more libertarian (radical freedom from
government intervention) than anything else. Richard Korty also saw socialism as a tailure:
"Just about the only constructive suggestion Marx made, the abolition of private property, has
been tried. It did not work. Korty criticized socialism and offered an alternative, writing,
Most people on my side of this... cultural war have given up on socialism in light of the
history of nationalization [of] enterprises and central planning in Central and Eastern
Europe. We are willing to grant that welfare-state capitalism is the best we can hope
for. Most of us who were brought up Trotskyite now feel forced to admit that Lenin
and Trotsky did more harm than good.62
In place of Marxism, Rorty suggested a form of intervention that is neither a totally state-
planned economy nor a completely free market economy but a combination of the two. The
state would redistribute wealth created in a partially or mostly free market environment. He
called it "welfare-state capitalism."
Rorty was not as shy as other Postmodernists about proposing a direction he thought
society should go and in suggesting universal ethical norms that he elsewhere claimed did
not exist. Economics, he said, should have as its "transcultural imperative" the alleviating of
human suffering. 63 Economic interventionism will accomplish this, he thought. As he told
a college audience in 1999,
The non-West has a lot of justified complaints to make about the West, but it does owe
a lot to Western ingenuity. The West is good at coming up with devices for lessening
human suffering... These devices are used to prevent
the strong from having their way with the weak and,
Economic Interventionism:
an economic system in
which the government
influences aspects of a
market economy in an
attempt to improve the
thereby, to prevent the weak from suffering as much
as they would have otherwise.
Other Postmodernists, however, believe Rorty is
too optimistic and that all economic systems are a disap-
pointment. lain Grant writes, "If the tools of the past-
Marxism, the Enlightenment project, market liberalism
and so on-have been tried and found wanting, then
[as Jean-Francois Lyotard suggested] experiment is de-
manded? If everything we have tried has failed, what is the harm in experimenting? Maybe,
by chance, we will invent some new economic idea that will better serve people.
Even Ruccio and Amariglio try to limit their readers expectations: "We don't envision
(or for that matter, seek to promote) a separate Postmodern economic theory. ° In tact, they
are "hesitant to argue that Postmodernism shows the way forward" and are content wit
conversations and encounters "rather than a new economic] home. When one starts with
the denial of the truth of human nature, even of the self, as Postmodernism does, it is hard
to arrive at anything approximating an economic viewpoint (or any other type of viewpoint,
for that matter). And without any true access to reality,
developing a system of economic exchange based on
trust is simply impossible.
Without any true access
to reality, developing
a system of economic
8. NEW SPIRITUALITY
exchange based on trust
New Spirituality focuses on tapping into the higher
is simply impossible.
consciousness. Consciousness, New Spiritualists be-
lieve, is what is really real. It makes the universe operate etficiently and effectively. If we
can tap into it, then we can transtorm human society. Michael Bernard beckwith say
There is a lie that acts like a virus within the mind of humanity. And that lie is, "There's
not enough good to go around! There's lack and there's limitation and ther's just not
enough. And that lie has people living in fear, greed, stinginess. And those thoughts
of fear, greed, stinginess, and lack become their experience. So the world has taken a
nightmare pill. The truth is that there's more than enough good to go around. Theres
more than enough creative ideas. There's more than enough power. There's more than
enough love. There's more than enough joy. All of this begins to come through a mind
that is aware of its own infinite nature. 68
The universe wants life and abundance, New Spiritualists say. It wants to evolve. And
since abundance is immaterial (of the spirit), the way to make it come to you is to act as if
you have it. Eckhart Tolle puts it this way: "You don't have it? Just act as if you had it, and it
will come. Then, soon after you start giving, you will start receiving. You cannot receive what
you don't give. Outflow determines inflow"69
This may sound like an odd way to approach economics, but to New Spiritualists, what
actually exists is the immaterial world, not the material, and any economic system failing to
take this into account will be inadequate. Marilyn Ferguson claimed, "Both capitalism and
socialism, as we know them, pivot on material values. They are inadequate philosophies for
a transformed society? Economic problems are a symptom of a greater spiritual probiem.
Shirley MacLaine believes that greed, envy, slander, theft, and covetousness are only a man
ifestation of the need for human love??!
All concern with the marketplace Will be moot in the coming transtormed New Agc.
People of the future will not be concerned with meeting financial needs but with pursuing
their inner truth. New Spiritualists believe if we all follow our inner voice, society will lack
for nothing. Shakti Gawain says,
We make a contribution to the world just by being ourselves in every moment. There
are no more rigid categories in our lives—this is work, this is play. It all blends into th
flow of following the universe and money flows in as a result of the open channel that's
created. You no longer work in order to make money. Work is no longer something
you have to do in order to sustain life. Instead, the delight that comes from expressing
yourself becomes the greatest reward.?
Gawain also says, "The more you are willing to trust yourself, and take the risks to tollow
and do what you really love!"
our inner guidance, the more money you will have. The universe will pay you to be yourself
- 411*


<!-- page-10 (book p.413) -->

In New Spiritualist economics, "The r' ore attuned a person is to higher consciousness
the more the universe will demonstrate this level of enlightenment by mirroring more god
monev in action. The more enlightened a person is, the more money and success will naturally
occur the awn inge that we call the New Spiritualist view of economic
universal enlightened production.
As Marianne Williamson says,
"Our purpose on this earth is to be happy? Personal
prosperity is at the heart of New Spiritualist economics. In many ways, this seems selfish but
can sound almost biblical to the nondiscerning. As Kevin Ryerson says, "God does not work
for you; God works through you."76
As we saw in our chapter on politics, some New
Universal Enlightened
Production: the belief
that an individual's
financial success is directly
proportional to his or her
level of enlightenment; the
belief that positive thought
creates wealth.
Spiritualists think more meditation would lead to greater
health and productivity. Big government wouldn't be as
necessary. Others desire something more invasive. Vera
Alder, for example, described the monetary system of
the future: "As ... individual needs would largely be sup-
plied on the ration-card system, the need for handling
of money would dwindle. There would, of course, be
a universal currency the world over. There would be a
central bank"
Few New Spiritualists concern themselves with economics because they assume that
economics is a matter for the unenlightened. There is no need to study economic systems to
discover the nature of the economic realm. When people achieve higher consciousness, they
will make wise economic choices. They will achieve material success. Poverty will disappear.
Economic theorizing will be irrelevant.
9. ISLAM
Khurshid Ahmad says, "Islamic economics is rooted in Islam's particular worldview and
derives its value-premises from the ethico-social teachings of the Quran and Sunnah? At
this point, Islam's economic program is not evident because, according to Syed Nawab Haider
Naqi, the national professor of economics in Pakistan, it is still "an evolving discipline?"
Naqvi says, "The Muslim society of today is not yet a society on its own. It is still under the
shadow of the Western system: and, as such, it is doubtful how 'representative of the Islamic
ethos its current behavior can be 80
Still, it's not hard to look at Islam!! TSefs about God, human nature, and the world and
figure out what a consistent Islamic economic viewpoint would be.
• Islam does not have a concept of original sin that taints everything and everyone.
• Everyone in the world was brag • Muslim-if they are not now Muslim, it is because
they are in rebellion and must be brought back in line.
• There is an afterlife and there will be a final judgment. No action is hidden from God
Quran 9:105).
• God exists and is just, and his will as revealed in the Ouran instructs Muslims to feed
he poor, give alms, help orphans, provide loans without interest (to Muslims), not
hoard food, and not gamble.
Islamic economics does not just involve a series of prohibitions. Muslims are to work hard
and share their wealth with fellow Millylims in need. They can earn income, amass wealth,
and enjoy all good things.
The principles of shariah law do have an economic component, however limited. We call
this shariah economics. According to Naqvi, the Islamic economic vision is based on four
foundational principles for the Islamic approach to eco-
nomic: unity, equilibrium, free will, and responsibility.
Let's look at each in turn.
1. Unity. In Islamic theology, God is a stark unity,
a single divine person without partners. This concept is
called tawhid (sometimes spelled tawheed or tauhid). He
is the creator of all things, the one to whom all humans
Shariah Economics:
derived primarily from the
Quran and Sunnah, shariah
economics is the economic
requirements that govern
the lives of Muslims.
will give account. As such, all humans should submit to
God. They must become Muslim. Islam means "submis-
sion," as we have seen, and this entails aligning all desires, ambitions, and actions with God's
will, a will expressed in his commands. "My service and sacrifice, my life and my death, are
all of them for God, the creator and Lord of all the worlds" (Quran 6:162). Corresponding
to the unity of God is the unity of humanity, which requires political unity. Muslims do not
believe in human fallenness in the same way Christians do, so they tend to be less suspicious
than Christians of concentrated political power. We must
albe united in a global Islamic state, Muslims believe.
National boundaries, war, and religious divisions may
make this seem impossible, but economic resources must
be used to fulfill this vision of universal unity of the
ummah, the Muslim community.
Ummah: from the Arabic
word for "nation,"
ummah is the collective
community of Muslims
around the world.
2. Equilibrium. "Verily God has enjoined justice and
kindness* (Quran 16:90). Muslims must reflect justice
and kindness in all social institutionturaot just economic transactions, and also in the care of
the poor. As such. "the needs of all +e 'geast-fortunate members in Muslim society constitut
the first charge on the real resources ad the societv" observes Naavi. Islam affirms the value
of private property and recognizes tr e reality of economic disparity. But Islam also affirm
that there is a basic standard ofliving *se.g., food, clothing, shelter) due to all. Regular warnings
are given to the wealthy (59:7; 70:24-25).
3. Free will. Muslims believe we are responsible for our beliefs and actions. We can choose
to do right or wrong; we are capable of both virtue and vice. Greed, selfishness, gluttony,
exaggerated materialism, and the like are expressions of our nature gone astray. Naqvi says,
In the final analvsis, we can say that, notwithstanding the differences of emphasis, there
has been a tacit agreement among theologians that man is responsible for his acts,


<!-- page-11 (book p.415) -->

and that God, by His very nature, is just in deciding man's fate according to his deeds.
Concomitantly therefore, man must have freedom of will in shaping his destiny!?
4. Responsibilitv, Corresponding to free will is responsibility. Not only are we respon-
sible to God: we are also responsible to our fellow humans. Almsgiving is central to being
responsible in our economic activities and "mostly takes the form of giving to the poor and
the needy» Hoarding wealth at the expense of the well-being of other Muslims is prohibited.
"You will never come to piety unless you spend of things you love" (Quran 3:92). Muslims
believe that by giving we become better people and fulfill our moral responsibility to God,
ourselves, and our fellow human beings. Some even believe that generosity can atone for sins.
Muslim law has economic implications in four areas.
1. Almsgiving. The Arabic word for almsgiving is zakat. It is one of the pillars of Islam.
Every Muslim is required to give 2.5 percent (one-fortieth) of his or her annual net income
(income after expenses, taxes, etc.) to the poor, either directly or through charities. 84
2. Inheritance. While Islam respects the individual's right to own property, that right
terminates on the owner's death, and the property is distributed according to a complex for-
mula. A Muslim's estate is to be divided up among relatives (Quran 2:180). Upon the death
of a wife, the husband is to receive one-half of her estate, while upon the death of a husband,
the wife is to receive one-quarter of his estate (4:7-12). Such practices, unequal though they
are, are understood as a divine wealth-redistribution plan.
3. Riba. Islamic economics prohibits interest on
loans (Quran 2:274-76, 278-79; 3:130-31; 30:39; 83:1-
Zakat: the fourth pillar
of Islam, zakat is the
donation of 2.5 percent of
a Muslim's annual income.
6). This is commonly understood to mean that when
lending money to fellow Muslims, interest on that loan
is forbidden. But some Muslims wonder whether the
prohibition pertains to any interest at all, or to usury, a
word that means "excessive or unfair interest," not simple
interest. "Nearly all English translations of the Quran
Riba: an Arabic word
meaning either interest or
excessive interest.
translate riba as usury," Nagvi observes. Nevertheless,
Naqvi says, some Muslims seek to replace all forms of
interest with something they refer to as profit-and-loss
sharing (PLS). Unfortunately, as a financial instrument,
PLS is not doing well and may not be able to sustain
Usury: the practice of
lending money at an
exorbitant rate of interest.
Islamic economics in the long term®?
4. Jizya. Unbelievers in Muslim communities are
called dhimmis. While Jews and Christians are "people
of the Book, they are not Muslim and do not enjoy
the same privileges as Muslims. As we have noted
Jizya: a tax imposed
on dhimmis (i.e., non-
Muslims) living in Islamic
states.
in previous chapters, they are taxed at much higher
rates— rates unspecified in the Quran (9:29. Usually
this extra tax, called the jizya, is supposed to be in
return for protection and provision as non-Muslim cit-
izens within these communities. However, historically
seizure of property, dismemberment, torture, and death &
this has often led to various forms of abuse, including destruction of churches, slavery,
While the principles of Islamic economics are set forth by Muslim scholars, such as Ham-
mudah Abdalati and Syed Naqvi, current economic practices in Muslim nations don't look
anything like the ideal. "A small wealthy class rules many Muslim nations while the masses
are extremely poor" observes George Braswell Jr. "In some countries the government collects
zakat; many people resent the zakat and question how the money is used. Islam prohibits usury,
vet this prohibition is seldom followed either on an individual or national level. But even if
these conditions were fully met, oppression, alienation, terror, expulsion of non-Muslims
and death remains characteristic in almost all Muslim nations 39
10. CHRISTIANITY
Different Christians hold different views about which economic system most reflects bib-
lical teaching. Some believe the Bible encourages a system of private property and individual
responsibility (Isa. 65:21-25; Jer. 32:43-44; Acts 5:1-4; Eph. 4:28)." Others support a socialist
economy." Still others, called liberation theologians, believe the Bible teaches a form of Marxism
they believe will usher in the kingdom of God. All seem
to agree on one thing: Ultimately, God owns it all and
expects us to take care of it and increase its value. This
is called biblical stewardship.
No economic system can save us or usher in the
Biblical Stewardship:
the act of managing and
caring for resources that
ultimately belong to God.
kingdom of God. Still, the Bible presents many clear
principles that have specific economic implications:
"Better a little [wealth] with righteousness than great revenues with injustice" (Prov. 16:8),
and "Let the thief no longer steal, but rather let him labor, doing honest work with his own
hands, so that he may have something to share with anyone in need" (Eph. 4:28). And two
of the Ten Commandments ("Do not steal" and "Do not covet"% imply the legitimacy of
private property. Applying biblical principles like these leads to economic policies under
which humans can flourish.
Today, the realistic choice is between some form of socialism (centralized control) or
some form of capitalism (free enterprise or ODen markets). Neither economic system exists
in its purest form. All capitalist systems contain some elements of socialism and vice versi
Some Christians see television evangelists traveling on private jets and living in mansion
while poor people struggle, and thev view socialism as the antidote to such hypocrisy. Other
look at the principles of stewardship and hard work and prefer capitalism.
We must be clear: this is not a decision about whether or not to be just and compassionate
but rather about how to best be just and compassionate. Is it through freedom, rule of law,
initiative, ingenuity, and hard work or through centralized government planning? Ronald
Nash was a Christian philosopher and economist who put the distinction in perspective:
One dominant feature of capitalism is economic freedom, the right of people to ex-
change things voluntarily free from force fraud, and theft. Capitalism is more than
this, of course but its concern with free archange is obvious Socialism. on the other


<!-- page-12 -->

hand, seeks to replace the freedom of the market with a group of central planners who
exercise control over essential market functions.4
As we have seen in the preceng chapters, socialism has produced miserable results, even
if we set aside the moral problem of such massive and widespread coercion. Robert Sheaffe
says, "No intellectually honest person today can deny
that the history of socialism is a sorry tale of economic
When viewed through
the lenses of justice
and compassion, the
evidence demonstrates the
advantage of capitalism
over socialism.
failure and crimes against humanity"95
Additionally, when viewed through the lenses of jus-
tice and compassion, the evidence demonstrates the ad-
vantage of capitalism over socialism. In terms of justice,
socialism violates all five of the generally agreed-upon
principles outlined earlier. In terms of compassion, even
Secularists like Marvin Zimmerman admit, "I contend
that the evidence supports the view that democratic capitalism is more productive of human
good than democratic socialism%
Christians who believe socialism (or even communism) is more desirable than capital-
ism must trust that centralized planning will more justly distribute scarce resources despite
all the evidence against that proposition. It's the Christian thing to do, they say. After all,
the early Christians sold their belongings and held all things in common (Acts 2:44-45).
However, Christian socialists fail to consider that Acts 2:46-47 describes Christians eating
with others in their homes, and Acts 5:1-49 assumes that Christians are free to own and sell
property. The Bible respects private property and at the same time promotes the virtues of
sharing and giving. 10°
Of course, we must have a proper definition of capitalism—a word with a problematic
history—to make sense of all this. We think Rodney Stark's definition is sound:
Capitalism is an economic system wherein privately owned, relatively well-organized,
and stable firms pursue complex commercial activities within a relatively free (unreg-
ulated) market, taking a systematic, long-term approach to investing and reinvesting
wealth (directly or indirectly) in productive activities involving a hired workforce, and
guided by anticipated and actual returns.!
Starkargues that capitalism centers around property rights, free markets, free labor, cash-
credit, management, and an ethic that looks upon work as a virtue, not a vice. He maintains
that these virtues can be traced directly to Christian influence.!2
With this background, let's look at how biblical
Every person is
accountable to God for the
use of whatever he has.
principles and a proper understanding of capitalism
Biblical stewardship. We are accountable to God for
how we use property and how we steward it. E. Calvin
Beisner says, "Biblical stewardship views God as Owner
of all things (Ps. 24:1) and man-individually and collectively—as His steward. Every person
is accountable to God for the f whatever he has (Gen. 1:26-30, 2:15). Every personi
to serve others (Matt. 25:14-30).*103
responsibility as a steward is to merso mize the Owners return on His investment by using it
Private property. Those Christians who believe socialism is more just and compassion-
ate than capitalism say public ownership of property does away with greed and envy. This
way of thinking, though, is incompatible with biblical teachings. Irving E. Howard says,
"The commandment thou shalt not steal is the clearest declaration of the right to private
property in the Old Testament. pise the Old and New Testaments teach about private
property and good stewardship of prosperty. ' Beisner asks the pointed question, "Why does
cripture regre restitution, incant fo funge le restitution, in cases of thett, even it paying
cafestitution requires selling oneselt into slavery (Exodus 22:1ff.)?"106 Ownership of property
isa God-given right, and stewardship is a God-given responsibility.
Work. Our right to own property stems from our duty to work. After God sent Adam
and Eve away from the garden of Eden, he decreed a lifetime of hard work (Gen. 3:17-19) 107
However, work was a part of God's commands before the fall, and God still mercifully allows
the acquiring of property and ideas as a reward of hard work. The very existence of private
property encourages diligence and fruitfulness: "Lazy hands make a man poor, but diligent
hands bring wealth" (Prov. 10:4). The apostle Paul taught the relationship between work and
property when he said, "Even when we were with you, we gave you this rule: If a man will
not work, he shall not eat" (2 'Thess. 3:10). Hard work is the difference between those who
are talented and those whose talents produce high performance. 108
Trust. Scripture puts a high priority on truth: don't lie, don't cheat, and do unto others as
you would have them do to you. When people live by these principles, they trust one another
more, this sort of trust leads to a thriving nation and drastically lowers what economists
call transaction costs. Using data from the World Values Survey, researchers found a strong
correlation between a nation's level of trust and their economic growth, civic participation,
quality of government service, infant survival rate, educational achievement, tax compliance,
and eficient administration of laws. Corruption was significantly lower in these countries as
vel It the responsibility of each one of us to generate trust. According to Michael Lewiss
account of the financial crisis in the early theafity-first century, the country of Greece suffers
from a high rate of people who cheat on their taxes and try to take a large share of govern-
ment benefits. This systemic corry on has had a contagious effect on people, incentivizing
them to not follow the rules.'!!
Competition. The Bible instructs ete ployers to pay well those who work hard.''' Because
e lazy tend to become or remain poor (Prov. 10:4; 14:23; 21:25), '2 workers have an incentive
to produce at a high level, which is tHe: basis of what we call economic competition. Although
t sounds paradoxical, competition in the context of the
rule of law leads to cooperation in a well-functioning
capitalist society. This phenomenon is called the principle
Although it sounds
of comparative advantage, which savs that individuals
paradoxical, competition
in a free market economy can produce valuable goods
in the context of rule of
or services by specializing in an area where there is the
law leads to cooperation
least absolute disadvantage. In other words, focusing
in a well-functioning
on producing goods or services through cooperation
capitalist society.


<!-- page-13 (book p.419) -->

benefits society as a whole. This in turn creates more goods and services that can benefi
the poor and also reinforces, " worth and dignity in the sense that our work and diligenc
contribute to the welfare of society.
Social justice. Christian socialists believe our obligations to the poor demand an equal
sharing of limited resources. The Bible, however, stresses not showing special tavor to the
rich or to the poor (Lev. 19:15). ' E. Calvin Beisner counters the socialist interpretation of
social justice when he says, "God is not 'on the side of the poor, despite protests to the con-
trary. Any law, therefore, that gives an advantage in the economic sphere to anyone, rich or
poor, violates Biblical justice"' Justice requires equality before the law rather than equality
of income or ability. Impartiality, not equality, is the key to a biblical understanding. Beisner
continues, "The Bible demands impartiality, which—because people differ in interests, gifts,
capacities, and stations in life-must invariably result in conditional inequality 11s
11. CONCLUSION
When we examine the biblical principles of economics in light of the other competing
worldviews we are considering, several conclusions spring readily to mind.
• We should all work hard to produce abundance. Work is a virtue, not a vice.!6
• We should support the rule of law so people can have freedom to come up with ideas
and turn them into economic benefit for themselves and others.
• We should focus on impartial administration of justice rather than equal distribution
of goods.
• Equality is important, but the focus should be equal treatment before the law rather
than on equal economic outcome.'!?
• The Bible does not teach socialism or communism.!8
• We must take into consideration the rising generation —have we left them a sufficient
productive base so they too can thrive? Have we operated government in such a way
that it will help rather than hinder?
The Christian worldview embraces the peaceful and free exchange of goods and services
without fraud, theft, or breach of contract. Private property and stewardship are necessary
and good. While not everyone possesses the same skills,
The Christian worldview
embraces the peaceful and
free exchange of goods
and services without
fraud, theft, or breach of
contract.
interests, or connections, every human being does bear
God's image and is capable of working hard to come
up with good ideas to make life better for themselves
and others. If we all take responsibility to do this, we
will see abundas, 2012), 29 tinue to grow and truth and
rightness continue to spread throughout the world.
But there is still a problem. In our fallenness, we
humans too often forget the lessons learned from past
societies about how to establish good laws and encourage productive economic activity. The
study of history is necessary to help us grasp how people in the past thought and lived, and
how we might learn trom their successes fitid failures to help humans flourish in our own
ime. As we will see in the next chapter, though, the study of history isn't straightforward.
suggest for the future.
Each worldview approaches it dittere tly, and this affects what course of action its adherents
ENDNOTES
Batman's The Dark Knight'
. The Dark Knight Rises, directed by Christopner Nolan (Warner Brothers, 2012); see also Terry Bowyer, "Why
Instant Conservative
Classic," Forbes, July 26, 2012, www.forbes.com
sitesferybowyer/2012/07/26/why-batmans-the-dark-knight-rises-is-an-instant-conservative-clastc/
2. N. Cregory Mankiw, Principles of Economics, 4th ed. (Mason, OH: South-Western, 2007), 3.
3. Mankiw, Principles of Economics.
4. Genesis 1:28: "God blessed Adam and Eve). And God said to them, Be fruitful and multiply and fll the earth and
subdue it, and have dominion over the fish of the sea and over the birds of the heavens and over every living thing
that moves on the earth."
5. Cited in Partha Dasgupta, Economics: A Very Short Introduction (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Pres, 2007), 16.
6. Scot Todd, Fast Living: How the Church Will End Extreme Poverty (Colorado Springs: Compassion International, 2011, 71.
7. Sylvia Nasar, The Grand Pursuit (New York: Simon and Schuster, 2011), xili.
8. Nasar, The Grand Pursuit.
9. Economist Cleon Skousen called this the "five thousand year leap." For more information, see his book The Five
Thousand Year Leap: 28 Great Ideas That Changed the World (Provo, UT: PowerThink, 2009).
10. Growth in this sense is measured by "per capita GDP," which means the gross domestic product-the total of all
goods and services produced, divided by the number of people, and adjusted for inflation. Dasgupta, Economics, 17.
I1. Todd, Fast Living, 37.
12. Mankiw, Principles of Economics, 9.
13. Estimates are that up to 10 percent of the North Korean population may have starved to death as a result of the
actions of the totalitarian, communist North Korean government.
14. George Gilder, Wealth and Poverty (Washington, DC: Regnery, 2012), 42.
15. Gilder, Wealth and Poverty, 56.
16. Mankiw, Principles of Economics, 28-29.
17. Mankiw, Principles of Economics, 148.
18. The classic example of government interference in the economy was Franklin D. Roosevelts New Deal. Says
Clarence Carson, "The New Deal gave the impression that much was going on and something was being done,
epely in the early months. It was the responsibility of government to set things right, so is programs said, to
rescue the banks, manage the money, organize and rehabilitate industry, put people to work, provide emerie nas
relief, save the farmers, and put everything on an even keel. Thy ew Deal was part bread and part circus; it was
scurry, experiment. legislate, create agencies, and spudaxe uns he motif of the New Deal was to do something
Textbook Committee, 1985), 50.
even if it was wrong, but do something." ly. Trence B. Carson, The Welfare State, 1929-1985 (Wadley, AL: American
19. ly Richards, Money, Greed, and God (New York: HarperOne, 2009), 47.
21. Meredith, The Fate of Africa.
20. Martin M :dith, The Fate of Africa: A History of Fifty Years of Independence (New York: Public Affairs, 2005), 684.
22. Dasgupta, Economics, 20.
23. Dasgupta, Economics, 24.
24. Michael Novak, The Fire of Invention (Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield. 1997), 53
25. Bernard Lonergan, Insight: A Study of Human Understanding (Ne' 'ork: Longmans, 1951), 4, quoted in Novak, nire
26, Jim Clifton, The Comine Jobs War (New York. Gallup, 2011), 51.
27. Gilder, Wealth and Poverty, 45.
28. Daniel Pink, To Sell Is Human (New York: Riverhead Books, 2012), 29.
29. Gilder, Wealth and Poverty, 37.
30. Dasgupta, Economics, 126-127.
31. Richard D. Lamm, "I Have a Plan to Destroy America," Centennial Review 5, no. 5 (May 2013): 1.
%. Keynes athy ed that because the level of output and employment chiefly respond to the rate of consumer
demand, we should use fiscal or monetary policies to stimulate demand. In Gilder, Wealth and Poverty, 55.


<!-- page-14 -->

22 This figure is derived from a presentation titled "A Borrowed Prosperity, delivered by Toby Neugebauer
cofounder of Ouantum Energy Partners, available at Summit Ministries, http://vimeo.com/29115347. Neugebauer
shows that in the last decade, every incrementa dollar of debt added only eight cents of real economic value to the
$1.08. If the return is only $0.08, it means you have lost $0.92.
gross domestic product (GDP). If you invested a dollar and wanted an 8 percent return, the return would need to b
34. Erich Fromm, On Disobedience and Other Essays (New York: Seabury, 1981), 75-76.
35. Fromm, On Disobedience and Other Essays, 62.
36. Corliss Lamont, Voice in the Wilderness (Buffalo: Prometheus Books, 1975), 166.
37. Lamont, Voice in the Wilderness. Lamont was clearly confused about economic theories. In reality, fascism is more
closely akin to socialism than to capitalism, for while fascism leaves titular ownership of productive property in
private hands, it insists that only the central government should control productive property. Capitalist philosophy
has always held that control is an essential element of ownership. The only difference between fascism and socialism,
therefore, is that the former allows people to hold legal title to capital, but neither allows them to control it.
38. Fromm, On Disobedience and Other Essays, 90.
39. John Kenneth Galbraith, Economics, Peace, and Laughter (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1971), 101.
40. Erich Fromm, Beyond the Chains of Ilusion (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1962), quoted in Ross Ellenhorn,
"Toward a Humanistic Social Work: Social Work for Conviviality," Humanity and Society (May 1988): 166.
41. Erich Fromm, The Sane Society (New York: Holt, 1990), 277.
42. John Dewey, Liberalism and Social Action (New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1935), 356-57.
43. Jonah Goldberg, Liberal Fascism: The Secret History of the American Left from Mussolini to the Politics of Meaning (New
York: Doubleday, 2007), 336.
44. Karl Marx, Capital (London: Sonnenschein, 1982), 660-61, quoted in Harry W. Laidler, History of Socialism (New
York: Thomas Y. Crowell, 1968), 152-53.
45. Gilder, Wealth and Poverty, 51.
46. Frederick Engels, Socialism: Utopian and Scientific (New York: International Publishers, 1935), 69.
47. Raymond Sleeper, ed., A Lexicon of Marxist-Leninist Semantics (Alexandria, VA: Western Goals, 1983), 30.
48. Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Collected Works, 40 vols. (New York: International Publishers, 1976), 6:350.
49. Marx and Engels, Collected Works, 6:351.
50. V. I. Lenin, Collected Works, 45 vols. (Moscow: Progress Publishers, 1980), 30:107.
51. G. A. Kozlov, ed., Political Economy: Socialism (Moscow: Progress Publishers, 1977), 55.
52. Kenneth N. Cameron, Marxism: The Science of Society (Boston: Bergin and Garvey, 1985), 85.
53. Sleeper, Lexicon of Marxist-Leninist Semantics, 302.
54. Quoted in John Strachey, The Theory and Practice of Socialism (New York: Random House, 1936), title page.
55. David F. Ruccio and Jack Amariglio, Postmodern Moments in Modern Economics (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press, 2003), 17-18.
56. Ruccio and Amariglio, Postmodern Moments, 14.
57. Stanley Kurtz, "Can We Make Boys and Girls Alike? City Journal, 2005, www.city-journal.org/html/1.2.boys.
58. Anthony Thomson, "Post-Modernism and Social Justice, paper presented at annual meeting of the society of
Socialist Studies, St. John's, Newfoundland, June 7, 1997, http://ace.acadiau.ca/soci/agt/constitutivecrim.htm, citing
Stuart Henry and Dragan Milovanovic, Constitutive Criminology: Beyond Postmodernism (London: Sage, 1996), 4.
59. Robert Eaglestone, ed., Routledge Critical Thinkers (New York: Routledge, 2003), 15.
bO. Mark Lila, The Reckless Mind: Intelctuals in Politics (New York: New York Review Books, 2001), 153, Foucaults
biographer, Didier Eribon, wrote, Foucault "had been seen with an iron rod in his hands, ready to do battle with
MA: Harvard University Press, 1992), 209.
militant communists; he had been seen throwing rocks at the police." Didier Eribon, Michel Foucault (Cambridg
61. Richard Rorty, Philosophy and Social Hope (New York: Penguin, 2000), 214.
Edmundson (New York: Penguin Books, 1993), 47.
62. Richard Rorty, "Trotsky and Wild Orchids," in Wild Orchids and Trotsky: Messages from American Universities, ed., Mark
63. Rorty, "Trotsky and Wild Orchids."
54. Richard Rorty, "The Communitarian Impulse, speech at Colorado College, Colorado Springs, Colorado
February 5, 1999, www2.coloradocollege.edu/academics/anniversary/Transcripts/RortyTXT.htm.
65. Quoted in Stuart Sim, ed., The Routedge Companion to Postmodernism (London: Routledge, 2004), 40.
66. Ruccio and Amariglio, Postmodern Moments, 295.
67. Ruccio and Amariglio, Postmodern Moments, 299.
68. Quoted in Rhonda Byrne, The Secret (New York: Atria Books, 2006), 147.
69. Eckhart Tolle, A New Earth (New York: Plume, 2005), 191.
70. Marilyn Ferguson, The Aquarian Conspiracy (Los Angeles: J. P. Tarcher, 1980), 326-27.
71. Shirley MacLaine, Out on a Limb (New York: Bantam Books, 1989), 291.
13. Gawain, Living in the Light, 142.
72. Shakti Gawain, Living in the Light (San Rafael, CA: New World Library, 1986), 110.
15. Quoted in Baer, Inside the New Age Nightmare, 171.
74. Randall N. Baer, Inside the New Age Nightmare (Lafayette, LA: Huntington House, 1989), 140.
16. Kevin Ryerson, Spirit Communication: The SoulS Path (New York: Bantam BooKS, 1909), 160
77. Vera Alder, When Humanity Comes of Age (New York: Samuel Weiser, 1974), 48-49.
79. Naqi, Islam, Economics, and Society, xiv.
78. Quoted in Syed Nawab Haider Naqv, stam, Economics, and Society (London: Kegan Paul International, 1994), xu
80. Naqvi, Islam, Economics, and Society.
81. Naqvi, Islam, Economics, and Society, 27-28.
82. Naqvi, Islam, Economics, and Society, 35.
83. Naqvi, Islam, Economics, and Society, 32.
81. A mans) personal expenses, his family allowances, his necessary expenditures, his due credits all are paid fist.
and Zakatis for the net balance. Hammudah Abdalati, Islam in Focus (Indianapolis: American Trust, 1975), 97.
85. This wasnit the case when Abraham purchased a piece of property to bury his wife Sarah (Gen. 2312-20).
Abraham certainly expected "deeded property" would last more than two generations!
86. Naqvi, Islam, Economics, and Society, 117.
87. A profit-and-loss-sharing arrangement avoids charging interest by purchasing an item (eg., house, equipment,
etc.) on behalf of the person who wants it and then reselling it to him or her at a profit, usually accepting installment
payments. Such contracts can be grouped together and sold like shares of stock that can go up or down in value
depending on their performance. For more see Naqvi, Islam, Economics, and Society, 141-43.
88. See the discussion in Stuart Robinson, Mosques and Miracles: Revealing Islam and God's Grace, 2nd ed. (Upper Mt.
Gravatt, Australia: City Harvest, 2004), 202. Robinson records that even as recent as 1997, almost fifty Christians
were killed, several in a Sunday school class, apparently because they failed to pay jizya.
89. The Voice of the Martyrs illustrates this observation with impressive regularity (www.persecution.com).
90. Isaiah 65:21-25: "They shall build houses and inhabit them; they shall plant vineyards and eat their fruit. They
shall not build and another inhabit; they shall not plant and another eat; for like the days of a tree shall the days of
my people be, and my chosen shall long enjoy the work of their hands. They shall not labor in vain or bear children
for calamity, for they shall be the offspring of the blessed of the LorD, and their descendants with them. Before they
call will answer; while they are yet speaking I will hear. The wolf and the lamb shall graze together; the lion shall eat
straw like the ox, and dust shall be the serpent's food. They shall not hurt or destroy in all my holy mountain, says
the LoRD"; Jeremiah 32:43-44: "Fields shall be bought in this land of which you are saying, 'It is a desolation, without
man or beast; it is given into the hand of the Chaldeans! Fields shall be bought for money, and deeds shall be signed
and sealed and witnessed, in the land of Benjamin, in the places about Jerusalem, and in the cities of Judah, in the
cies of the hill ountry, in the cities of the Shephelah, and in the cities of the Negeb; for I will restore their fortunes,
declares the LORD"; Acts 5:1-4: A man named Ananias, with his wife Sapphira, sold a piece of property, and with
his wife's knowledge he kept back for himself some of the proceeds and brought only a part of it and laid it at the
apostes feet. But Peter said, 'Ananias, why has Satan filled your heart to lie to the Holy Spirit and to keep back vas
yourself part of the proceede of the land? While it remained unsold. did it not remain your own? And after it wa
sold, was it not at your disposal? Why is it that you have contrived this deed in your heart? You have not lied to ma
but to God"; Ephesians 4:28: "Let the thief no longer steal, but rather let him labor, doing honest work with his own
hands, so that he may have something to share with anyone in need"
91. As we discussed earlier, socialism basically means "the absence of private property." More specifically, the mean
of production are owned in common, by the force of law. To gain biblical support for this, socialists often cite Acts
44445, in which the believers held their goods in common. This is a problematic interpretation for two reason
First, in the early church people gave up their goods willingly, not by government edict. Second, the ownership •
private property is assumed: people couldn't have sold their goods if they did not own them in the first plac
92. See also 1 Timothy 6:17-19: "As for the rich in this present age, charge them not to be haughty, nor to set the
nopes on the uncertainty of riches, but on God, who richly provides us with everything to enjoy. They are to do
good, to be rich in good works, to be generous and ready to share, thus storing up treasure for themselves as a
good foundation for the future, so that they may take hold of that which is truly life"; 2 Thessalonians 3:7-13: "You
ourselves know how you ought to imitate us, because we were not idle when we were with you, nor did we eat
anyone's bread without paying for it, but with toil and labor we worked night and day, that we might not be a burden
o any of you. It was not because we do not have that right, but to give you in ourselves an example to imitate. For
ven when we were with you, we would give you this command: If anyone is not willing to work, let him not eat. Fo
we hear that some among you walk in idleness, not busy at work, but busybodies. Now such persons we comman


<!-- page-15 (book p.422) -->

and encourage in the Lord Jesus Christ to dog at 91 rk quietly and to earn their own living. As for you, brothers,
do not grow weary in doing good."
93. See Exodus 20:15-17.
94. Ronald H. Nash, Poverty and Wealth: The Christian Debate over Capitalism (Westchester, IL. Crossway Books, 1987), 63.
95. Robert Sheaffer, "Socialism Is Incompatible with Humanism," Free Inquiry (Fall 1989): 19.
96. Quoted in Paul Kurtz, ed., Sidney Hook: Philosopher of Democracy and Humanism (Buffalo: Prometheus Books, 1983), 80.
97. Acts 2:41 45: "All ho believed were together and had all things in common. And they were selling their
possessions and belongings and distributing the proceeds to all, as any had need."
98. Acts 2:46-47: "Day by day, attending the temple together and breaking bread in their homes, they received their
food with glad and generous hearts, praising Cod and having favor with all the people. And the Lord added to their
number day by day those who were being saved."
99. Acts 5:1-4: "A man named Ananias, with his wife Sapphira, sold a piece of property, and with his wit's
knowledge he kept back for himself some of the proceeds and brought only a part of it and laid it at the apostles
feet. But Peter said, Ananias, why has Satan filled your heart to lie to the Holy Spirit and to keep back for yourself
part of the proceeds of the land? While it remained unsold, did it not remain your own? And after it was sold, was it
not at your disposal? Why is it that you have contrived this deed in your heart? You have not lied to man but to God!"
100. See especially Proverbs 31; Isaiah 65:21-22; Jeremiah 32:43-44; Acts 5:1-4; and Ephesians 4:28.
101. Rodney Stark, The Victory of Reason: How Christianity Led to Freedom, Capitalism, and Western Success (New York:
Random House, 2005), 56.
102. Stark, Victory of Reason, 55.
103. E. Calvin Beisner, Prosperity and Poverty: The Compassionate Use of Resources in a World of Scarcity (Westchester, IL:
Crossway Books, 1988), xi-xii.
104. Irving E. Howard, The Christian Alternative to Socialism (Arlington, VA: Better Books, 1966), 4.
105. See Genesis 23:13-20; Deuteronomy 8; Ruth 2; Isaiah 65:21-22; Jeremiah 32:42-44; Psalm 112; Proverbs 31; Micah
4:1-4; Luke 12:13-15; Acts 5:1-4; Ephesians 4:28.
106. Beisner, Prosperity and Poverty, 66.
107. Genesis 3:17-19: "To Adam [God] said, Because you have listened to the voice of your wife and have eaten of the
tree of which I commanded you, you shall not eat of it, cursed is the ground because of you; in pain you shall eat of
it all the days of your life; thorns and thistles it shall bring forth for you; and you shall eat the plants of the field. By
the sweat of your face you shall eat bread, till you return to the ground, for out of it you were taken; for you are dust,
and to dust you shall return!"
108. An excellent book on this topic is Geoffrey Colvin, Talent Is Overrated (New York: Portfolio, 2008).
109. World Values Survey, cited in Dasgupta, Economics, 58.
110. Michael Lewis, Boomerang (New York: W. W. Norton, 2011), 54.
III. Leviticus 19:13: "You shall not oppress your neighbor or rob him. The wages of a hired worker shall not remain
with you all night until the morning"; Deuteronomy 24:14-15: "You shall not oppress a hired worker who is poor
and needy, whether he is one of your brothers or one of the sojourners who are in your land within your towns.
You shall give him his wages on the same day, before the sun sets (for he is poor and counts on it), lest he cry against
you to the LORD, and you be guilty of sin"; Deuteronomy 25:4: "You shall not muzzle an ox when it is treading out
the grain"; 1 Timothy 5:18; "The Scripture says, You shall not muzzle an ox when it treads out the grain; and, The
laborer deserves his wages.!"
112. Proverbs 10:4: "A slack hand causes poverty, but the hand of the diligent makes rich"; Proverbs 14:23: "In all toil
there is profit, but mere talk tends only to poverty";: Proverbs 21:25: "The desire of the sluggard kills him, for his
hands refuse to labor."
113. Leviticus 19:15: "You shall do no injustice in court. You shall not be partial to the poor or defer to the great, but
in righteousness shall you judge your neighbor."
114. Beisner, Prosperity and Poverty, 52.
115. Beisner, Prosperity and Poverty.
116. The Greeks and Romans, in contrast, groun nobua pulse for slavery in the idea that work is a vice, a view boun
Aristotle and Plato endorsed. Stark, Victory of Reason, 26-27.
117. Michael Novak explains: "Given the diversity and liberty of human life, no fair and free system can possiby
[guarantee equal outcomes. A democratic system depends for its legitimacy, therefore, not upon equal results but
upon a sense of equal opportunity." Michael Novan Sị4.L 81]it of Democratic Capitalism (New York: Simon and Schuster,
118. This was evident even to Engels, who wrotas e uodne few passages of the Bible may be favourable to communis,
the general spirit of its doctrines is, neverthelessis totally opposed to it." Marx and Engels, Collected Works, 3:399
