# Chapter 1

<!-- page-1 -->

THE BATTLE
OF IDEAS
CHAPTER 1 LEARNING OBJECTIVES
Students will be able to:
1. articulate why patterns are an important key to understanding the world. [1.1]
name two keys to successfully navigate through life. [1.2]
explain why David Noebel felt called to write this textbook. [1.3]
4. 5.
articulate why spotting patterns can sometimes be difficult. [1.4]
define a worldview. [1.5]
list reasons why it is important for Christians to study worldviews. [1.6]
7. explain why Christian worldviews come under attack. [1.7]
8. identify how worldviews spread and how to guard against adopting counterfeit
worldviews. [1.8]
9. name and explain the six dominant worldviews of Western culture. [1.9]
10. explain how these disciplines guide how they look at the world. [1.10]
11. explain how Christianity addresses the ten academic disciplines. [1.11]
12. apply the four criteria for testing the truth of a worldview. [1.12]
13. respond to the parable of the elephant. [1.13]
14. state why every worldview cannot be correct. [1.14]


<!-- page-2 -->

CHAPTER 1
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. What can we learn from sports like tennis and games like chess about how the world
works? [1.1-1.2]
Sports and games illustrate two truths that can help us understand our world and make
it a better place:
1. We live in a rule-governed universe. Our world is governed by rules and principles.
We need to learn them and obey them if we want to "win" at the game of life.
2. When the rules are followed—or ignored—patterns emerge. Pattern recognition
is a key to shaping what we believe and how we behave.
Chapter 1.1 Activity
THE SECRET TO UNDERSTANDING THE WORLD OF IDEAS
Objective: Students will study a series of numbers and figure
out the pattern in the sequence of numbers.
• Materials Needed: paper and pencil
• Time Required: 10 minutes
1. Write this sequence of numbers on the board: 1, 9, 36, 100, 225. Allow 2-5 minutes for the
students to study the numbers and figure out the pattern.
2. Congratulate any students who recognized the pattern achieved by taking the cube of each
number and adding it to the previous number. On the board demonstrate the steps to solv-
ing the pattern: after 1 the number 2 is cubed to be 8 and 1 is added to 8 to make the sum
of 9; 3 cubed is 27 + 9 = 36;4 cubed is 64 + 36=100; 5 cubed is 125 + 100 = 225.
3. Now that students know the pattern, have them complete the next five numbers in the
pattern.
4. Give students two minutes to create a pattern of their own using numbers, alphabet letters,
or shapes. Have them trade papers with a classmate and try to figure out each other's pattern.
5. After about two minutes, inquire about the students' success in figuring out the patterns.
Discuss what clues and strategies they used to help them recognize the pattern. Challenge
students to watch for patterns throughout the day and record any clues that alerted them to
the patterns.
The concepts of rules and patterns also apply to the world we inhabit. It is governed by
a discernable set of rules and our ideas about this world can be arranged and cataloged
into discernable patterns (i.e., a worldview), which in turn will enable us to find purpose
and meaning in life, avoid mistakes and define success.
Another lesson we can learn is "practice makes better." (No one is perfect.) Remember
the 10,000-hour rule. It takes years to develop proficiency and skill, to train the eye what
to look for and the body how to respond. The same is true in the world of ideas. We must
train ourselves to see the ideas that influence the world and how they affect us.
Finally, a good coach or mentor can speed up the learning process and help us become
better than we ever could on our own. We need to find wise people who study ideas and
pay attention to what they pay attention to.
2. Do the patterns we see around us every day suggest answers to some of life's bigger
questions? What are some of those questions? [1.1-1.2]
• Where do we come from?
• Where are we going?
• How do we live a good life?
• What happens when we die?
• How can we tell what's good and bad, true or false, just or unjust?
• What can we do to make the world a better place?
3. You've never seen, touched or smelled an idea but you've had plenty of them. What
are ideas and how do they influence us? [1.4]
An idea is "a thought or suggestion as to a possible course of action." What we think
and believe, along with our general impressions about the world, are always based on
something. If they are not based on an accurate understanding of truth, we'll always be
disoriented, unable to distinguish between genuine clues and background nose.
4. Our ideas inform our beliefs and influence our behavior. Think of some bad ideas
humans have had and what happened as a result. Now do the same with some good
ideas.
Bad ideas:
• Atheism
Materialism
• Nazism
• Communism
• Slavery
• Facebook


<!-- page-3 -->

Good ideas:
• Humans made in the image of God
• The Golden Rule
• Freedom
• Justice
• Equal rights
• Facebook
5. Ideas flow together into complex patterns. Does the amount of information available
to us today make it easier or harder to see and understand patterns? [1.4]
Much harder! Thanks to the Internet, people have more information about everything
than ever before, including religion. But not all this information is true. Even utterly
wrong ideas can be promoted on cool websites and made to look credible. Anyone can
spout their opinions and share their experiences. There has never been a greater need
for discernment in filtering information to find knowledge that can lead to wisdom.
6. Where does the New Testament tell Christians to see the world differently from other
people? Why is this shift in perspective so important? [1.5]
In Romans 12:2, the apostle Paul writes, "Do not be conformed to this world, but be
transformed by the renewal of your mind, that by testing you may discern what is the
will of God, what is good and acceptable and perfect."
The pattern of the natural world doesn't conform to God's will. This is why Christians
must be able to recognize and refute the world's pattern. We are to be transformed by
renewing our minds. Then we will be able to understand how God created the world
and what his purpose is for us.
7. Everyone has a way of seeing the world—a worldview—even if he or she doesn't realize
it. What is a "worldview" and how does it influence the way we live? [1.5]
A worldview is a pattern of ideas, beliefs, convictions and habits that help make sense
of God, the world and our relationship to both. A worldview is like a map or a GPS
program that tells us where we are, where we need to go and the best route to get there.
Our worldview not only influences how we see and respond to things around us, it gives
us a sense of what the world should be like. It not only describes reality, it prescribes how
we should behave in every situation, despite our circumstances. It informs our beliefs
and influences our behavior.
Chapter 1.5 Activity
THE SECRET TO UNDERSTANDING THE WORLD OF IDEAS
Objective: Students will identify the people who influence them.
• Materials Needed: computer or paper, pencil, and highlighter
• Time Required: 15 minutes
1. Point out that students might never meet or talk with some of the people who influence
them. Often different people will influence them in different areas or stages of their lives.
2. Have the students make an extensive list of their influencers and their area of influence. For
example, my cousin influences my sense of fashion because she is a model in New York.
3. After a few minutes, mention that our families are often influenced by the same people,
but there can also be different influencers. Direct everyone to take his or her list and circle
the names of people that also influence their parents. Let them explain what they noticed
about the influencers they have in common with their parents and why some people are
not influencers of their parents.
4. Discuss how communities often have influencers who are popular or have a strong influ-
ence. Next, have the students read through their lists again and underline the names of
anyone they think influences the teachers and administration at your Christian school. Have
them compare and see what they notice about their markings.
5. Explain that, although they do not personally know their favorite actors or singers, there are
some clues about who might influence these celebrities. Have the class put a checkmark
beside the names of anyone they think might influence their favorite actors or singers. Ask
what pattern they see in the markings.
6. Mention the fact that just because people say they are Christians does not insure they
get their worldview from the Bible. Tell the class to review their list one last time and use
a yellow highlighter to mark the influencers they believe to be Christians. Ask them if
they noticed anything surprising about the number of names highlighted and names not
highlighted.
7. Inquire if students notice any patterns among the results of their lists and in comparison
to the lists of other students. Challenge them to pay attention to who they are allowing
to influence them and make any alterations necessary to assure they are accepting good
influences.
UNIT1


<!-- page-4 -->

CHAPTER1 DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
SKil
8. Most of us rely on GPS programs. (When was the last time you looked at a paper map?)
How many ways can you think of that a worldview and a GPS program are alike?
• Both can help us find our way in unfamiliar territory.
• Both can put our immediate location in perspective by placing it in a larger context.
• Both can analyze multiple routes and recommend the best one.
• You can choose to use or ignore the information they provide.
• Neither is influenced by subjective opinions.
9. What are some of the fundamental questions a worldview seeks to answer? [1.5]
• What does it mean to be human?
• What is the meaning and purpose of life?
• Is there a difference between right and wrong?
• Is there a God? If so, what is God like?
10. Do intangible ideas have tangible results? Do ideas have consequences? If so, in what
ways? [1.6]
Ideas aren't neutral: they inform our beliefs and behaviors; they shape our convictions
and cultures. They are at the heart of our worldview, which is how we make sense of the
world. History has shown over and over again that good ideas lead to healthy societies
while bad ideas lead to decay and destruction.
11. Can you give some examples from history where bad ideas had devastating
consequences? [1.6]
Nazism was directly responsible for the deaths of more than twenty-one million people,
in addition to the tens of millions who died as a result of World War II.
Communist regimes slaughtered well over one hundred million people in the twentieth
century and many still suffer and die under its influence today.
12. What is the risk if you defend a Christian worldview and question the worldviews
of others? [1.7]
You can expect to be attacked and belittled, especially by those in the academic and
scientific communities. Your faith may be mocked and your intelligence called into
question. You should not respond in the same manner but should address the criticisms
with reasonable arguments. This book will help equip you for the challenge.
UNIT
Chapter 1.6 Activity
WHY SHOULD WE CARE?
Objective: Students will research and share an example of a bad
belief that caused someone else serious pain.
• Materials Needed: computer or newspaper
• Time Required: 15-30 minutes
1. Divide the class into pairs. Make sure each pair has a computer or newspaper to use.
2. Direct students to conduct an Internet search or scan the local newspaper to find a current
example of a bad idea that caused someone else serious pain. For example, a young man
believed that drinking excessively was a good way to celebrate a recent victory on the foot-
ball field, but while driving home he lost control of his car and accidently took the life of a
young mother. Encourage students to work together to discern each bad idea and the nega-
tive consequences that followed.
3. Allow time for each pair to present their example to the class and explain what belief im-
pacted others in a negative way. Ask them to suggest a different action based on a different
belief that could have altered the situation.
13. Can you recall a time when you shared your Christian worldview or questioned the
worldview of a teacher or other adult who disagreed with you? What was the response?
[Answers will vary.]
14. In what ways are ideas like viruses? [1.8]
Both are spread by contact and can move quickly from person to person. Both can grow
exponentially and "go viral," affecting whole cultures. Both need the right conditions to
thrive and both can be slowed down or stopped by appropriate measures.
Some ideas are good and others are bad but both kinds are spread in the same way.


<!-- page-5 -->

*
15. How can we protect ourselves against bad ideas? [1.8]
As the body with viruses and the mind with ideas, there are ways to promote health and
fight disease. Here are six possible approaches to dealing with ideas:
• No preparation
• Reinforcement of previous preparation
• Warning of attack
• Inoculation
• Inoculation plus refutation
• Inoculation plus refutation plus preparation
The most effective strategy is the last one: inoculation plus refutation plus preparation.
The least effective strategy is reinforcement of previous preparation. Repeating a message
over and over again—even with increasing fervency and emotion is actually counter-
productive, worse than no preparation at all.
Inoculation involves telling the truth, exposing the lies that deceive people, showing
them how to refute those lies and preparing them with the thinking skills necessary to
resist and refute falsehoods. The starting point for all this is an understanding of the
dominant worldviews of our day.
16. Can you name the six dominant worldviews outlined in this chapter and summarize
each in a few sentences? [1.9]
The six dominant worldviews are Christianity, Islam, New Spirituality Secularism,
Marxism and Postmodernism.
Christianity is founded on Jesus Christ, the Messiah prophesied in the Old Testament
and God incarnated as a human being. Christians believe that God has revealed himself
in the Bible as well as in nature, but especially in the person of Jesus Christ.
Islam Is founded on the teachings of an Arabian trader named Muhammad. His submission
to God gave the religion its name; Islam means "submission." The holy book of Islam is
the Quran, believed by Muslims to be God's full and final revelation.
New Spirituality is a mix of Eastern religions, paganism, and pseudoscience. It teaches that
the world is spiritual but not governed by a personal, all-powerful God. This spirituality
is a "consciousness" we all can experience and learn to control.
Secularism believes humans are the center of reality and rejects the relevance of God, the
afterlife, and anything beyond what we can examine with our senses. Although claiming
to be nonreligious, Secularists do have beliefs about the cause, nature, and purpose of
the universe.
UNIT
Marxism was invented by Karl Marx, who defined history as a struggle between the haves
(the owners) and the have-nots (the workers). The utopian state he thought mankind
could achieve through class struggle is called communism.
Postmodernism is a reaction against modernism, the idea that science and human reason
can solve humankind's problems. Postmodernists question everything—even the idea
that we can ever know reality itself.
Chapter 1.9 Activity
THE SIX WORLD VIEWS
Objective: Students will write three questions they would
like answered about each of the six worldviews.
• Materials Needed: computer or paper and pencil
• Time Required: 10 minutes
1. Point out that although some basic knowledge has been presented about the six world-
views, volumes of information still exist about each worldview. Have your students write
three legitimate questions for each worldview they would like answered.
2. Let students find a partner and compare their lists of questions. Invite pairs to share any
questions they both had in common. Note the types of questions students have in common.
3. Direct students to set these questions aside and periodically refer to them and write the an-
swer when/if it gets answered.
4. Make a point at the end of this volume to have them check to see if their questions were
answered and compare the results they found with others. Use this as a way to encourage
students that their knowledge base has increased as a result of studying this textbook
17. Of the six worldviews, which ones would be considered theistic and which ones would
be called secular? [1.9]
It should be noted that any worldview addressing the question of God's existence is
religious. Thus every major worldview is religious. Of the six worldviews surveyed in


<!-- page-6 (book p.11) -->

fusos.
LoGos -
jolT
Psych
BREATU OF
LIFE
this course, three affirm the existence of a supernatural deity while the other three are
either skeptical or atheistic.
Theistic
Christianity
Islam
New Spirituality
Secularism
Postmodernism
18. An advanced education is comprised of basic disciplines or areas of study. This book
explores how ten basic academic disciplines are understood in the six worldviews
being studied. Can you name and define all ten? [1.10]
The basic disciplines are theology, philosophy, ethics, biology, psychology, sociology,
economics, law, politics, and history.
Theology is the study of God. It seeks to answer questions like: Does God exist? If God
exists, what is God like? How did I, and everything else, get here?
Philosophy means "love of wisdom." I's the study of knowledge, truth, reality, and how
we know what we know. It wants to understand the ultimate nature of things.
Ethics comes from ethos, the Greek word for "goodness." Ethics is interested in the moral
conduct, values, and duties that lead to "the good life."
Biology deals with the question "What does it means to be alive?" Biology is the study
oflifeland living organisms in the natural world, from their origins to their extinction.
-- Psychology is the study of the soul and is concerned with what makes us human. It tries
to understand how people act and why we do what we do.
Sociology is the study of human societies and how we live in community. It delves into
various cultures, languages, and beliefs and seeks to answer the questions: How do so-
cieties compare? How do we best live together?
Law has to do with how we govern ourselves in order to coexist peacefully as citizens.
It deals with what the basis for law is and what constitutes just and orderly governance.
Politics means "the rule of a city." It studies the best ways to organize community, which
includes neighborhoods, cities, counties, states, and nations.
Economics means "the art of running a household." It's the study of how to best use and
manage resources in order to be optimally productive.
History is the discipline focused on how people thought and lived in the past. What
happened then can help us better understand the present and prepare for the future.
Chapter 1.10 Activity
TEN WAYS OF LOOKING AT THE WORLD
Objective: Students will rank the 10 disciplines in order of importance in their lives
and explain how these disciplines guide how they look at the world.
• Materials Needed: computer or paper and pencil.
• Time Required: 15-30 minutes
1. Explain that the 10 disciplines mentioned relate to academia and not all students may feel
compelled to attend university and study these disciplines. God has created each student
with unique gifts and interests. Help students recognize that not everyone is called to pur-
sue these disciplines, but it is important that all students understand these areas and the
effect they have on how people view the world.
2. Have students rank these 10 disciplines in order of importance to their life and their future
studies.
3. Engage students in a discussion of how they chose the ranking of their top three choices
and how these disciplines affect how they look at their world. Ask students to explain what
other disciplines they would add to the list of 10 and why.
4. Challenge students to put a star by the three disciplines they want to learn more about and
to write the names of people who are involved in those disciplines and could be a source of
information for them.
5. Lead a discussion about people in your school, church, or community who are good re-
sources for any students who want to begin pursuing more knowledge in these disciplines.
19. What does the text say is the Christian perspective on the ten disciplines that make
up a worldview? [1.11]
Theology: A designed universe and a world prepared for human life point toward a per-
sonal and intelligent Creator who we believe also reveals himself in the Bible. Atheism
(belief in no god), polytheism (belief in many gods), or pantheism (belief in god as the
universe) don't explain who we are and how we got here nearly as well.


<!-- page-7 (book p.13) -->

Philosophy: The biblical notion of mind preceding matter is superior to the atheistic
idea of matter preceding mind. Christianity teaches we can know things because they
have been ordered in a way our senses can perceive by Jesus Christ, who is the "Logos
[revealed knowledge] of God" (John 1:1). Christianity opposes any philosophy that
denies objective reality or that limits the world to either matter (i.e., naturalism) or the
immaterial (i.e., non-naturalism).
Ethics: Christianity teaches that right and wrong are based on the nature and character of
a personal, loving God. This approach to morality is superior to any ethical theory based
upon evolution, moral relativism, pragmatism, or other human schemes. Jesus Christ
is the perfect example of how we should live. He is "the true light" (John 1:9; 3:19-20).
Biology: The existence of a personal, intelligent creator who designed the universe-and
us—for a specific purpose fits the evidence better than blind chance, spontaneous genera-
tion, or macroevolution. God's plan can be seen from the beginning when he organizes
each creature "according to its kind" (Gen. 1:21). Human beings are unique among God's
creation in that we bear his image and are much more than highly evolved animals.
Psychology: Christians believe that God designed human beings as material and spiritual
creatures, comprised of body and soul. Understanding this plus the idea that humans are
sinful, imperfect, and in need of being changed or "redeemed," makes more sense of our
behavior than seeing people as guilt-free moral agents in complete control of their actions.
Sociology: Historical evidence shows that society functions best when the family, church,
and state exercise their proper authority within their God-ordained spheres. At its most
basic level, society flourishes when built upon strong families composed of father, mother,
and children, as hinted at in Genesis 1.
Law: Christians believe that human beings flourish best in societies that promote justice
and order based on an understanding of God's nature and character as revealed in the
created order and in Scripture. God is a just God. This truth provides a firm foundation
for the laws governing human behavior.
Politics: The Christian belief that rights are a gift from God and secured by government
is more logically persuasive, morally appealing, and politically sound than any atheistic
theory that maintains human rights are derived from the state or that rights evolve to
meet the needs of human communities.
Economics: Christians believe in the concepts of private property and the responsible
stewardship of resources, which leads to greater human flourishing and dignity. They
oppose coercive government policies that destroy individual responsibility and incen-
tives to work and reject economic theories that abolish private property or arbitrarily
redistribute wealth.
History: Christians view the history of this world as having a beginning and a culmi-
nation. The Bible promises a future kingdom ushered in by Jesus Christ in which the
promise of all things being made new is more hopeful than nihilism or the limited
utopian schemes of mortal humans.
In every discipline, we believe the Christian worldview is more realistic, more scientific,
and more defensible. It does a better job of explaining our place in the universe.
20. It's not enough to say the Christian worldview is true and that it accurately represents
reality. The book Making Sense of Your World suggests four tests for determining
whether or not a worldview is true. Can you name and describe each in one sentence?
[1.12]
1. Test of reason: Can it be stated and defended logically?
2. Test of the outer world: Is there some external evidence to support it?
3. Test of the inner world: Does it adequately address personal experience?
4. Test of the real world: Does it lead to positive or negative consequences?
21. In your opinion, how does the Christian worldview hold up when these tests are
applied to it?
• Can Christianity be stated and defended logically?
• Is there external evidence to support Christianity?
• Does Christianity adequately address personal experience?
• Does Christianity lead to positive or negative consequences?
[Encourage free and open discussion. You're not looking for right or wrong answers so much
as discovering where the students are at in their understanding of worldviews in general
and Christianity in particular.]
22. Retell the parable of the elephant in your own words. How does each blind man
experience and describe the elephant? Are their descriptions true or false? [1.13]
Three blind men encounter an elephant. They don't have an objective experience of seeing
the elephant but they have a subjective experience of touching it. The first touches the
tail and says the elephant is like a rope. The second feels a leg and describes the elephant
as a tree. The third grabs the tusk and believes the animal is similar to a spear.
The descriptions are true perceptions based on limited subjective experience but they are
objectively false because they don't match the total reality of the elephant in the real world.
THE BATTLE OFIDEAS


<!-- page-8 (book p.15) -->

Rom 12:3; 1 Cor 13:1-3
23. The story of the blind men and the elephant is sometimes used to illustrate how
different worldviews can all be true. When used like this, what's the moral of the
story? [1.13]
The moral of the parable is that different worldviews are valid interpretations of reality.
No single worldview has the whole picture. Each is correct in its own way, based on its
limited knowledge.
Because of this, it is said, we should not make exclusive claims about "our" worldview
being better or truer than other worldviews. Since every worldview can only see part of
reality, no worldview should make generalizations about the whole.
24. What's the problem with this interpretation of the parable? [1.13]
When it comes to worldviews, they can't all be true because they make competing and
contradictory claims. Each one is limited to a small portion of the "elephant" of the
universe. The parable (1) assumes that no one can have a bird's eye view of the entire
elephant but (2) contains this elusive and unique bird's eye view of the entire elephant.
The only way to understand the moral of this parable is to see all of the parts of the el-
ephant simultaneously. Yet the parable states that everyone is limited to only a small part
of the elephant. Here's where the analogy breaks down. Christians believe it is possible
for someone to see the entire elephant (i.e., the world as it is), because God has given us
unique knowledge of himself and his creation.
25. Why can't all worldviews be true? [1.14]
In a nutshell, they have contradictory beliefs that can't all be true. According the law of
non-contradiction, two contradictory propositions cannot both be true at the same time
and in the same sense. For example, New Spirituality contends that God is impersonal,
while Christianity contends that God is personal. Marxism claims God doesn't exist, while
Islam insists he does. Postmodernism asserts that God is unknowable, while Christianity
teaches that we can know him. Everyone can't be right.
26. Christians recognize that God has communicated through his creation as well as
Scripture, so it's no surprise to find elements of truth in non-Christian worldviews.
Can you give some examples? [1.14]
Totally different patterns (worldviews) may still contain common threads (ideas:
Both Marxism and Secularism recognize the power of science to be applied for the bet-
terment of humanity.
New Spirituality and Islam both talk about God, though their understanding of God
could not be more incompatible.
UNIT1
Postmodernism and Christianity agree that science and human reason cant solve hu-
mankind's problems but they have radically different views of what those problems are
and how they can be addressed.
Most worldviews recognize there's something wrong with human beings that has to be
understood, controlled, and eventually fixed.
Most worldviews have a concept of justice, a sense that things are not as they ought to
be in the world.
Chapter 1.14 Activity
IRRECONCILABLE DIFFERENCES
Objective: Students will create a song, poster, slide presentation, or poem to
communicate to teens that every worldview cannot be correct.
• Materials Needed: various art supplies including papers and poster boards, pencils and mark-
ers, computers with presentation software
• Time Required: 60-80 minutes (two full class periods or work done at home
1. Discuss the Barna results which show that 63% of teens believe that all religions use differ-
ent names for the same god. Take a poll of your students and compare it to the Barna poll.
2. Ask students why they think teens believe this way and what might change their attitudes.
3. Have the students work alone or in small groups of their choosing to create a musical pre-
sentation, piece of artwork, or slide presentation to show teens that all religions are not
paths to the one, true God. Announce the two class periods you will make available for work
or the date they are to bring their completed projects for presentation to the class.
27. What's the major dividing line between Christian and non-Christian worldviews?
[1.13-1.14]
The major dividing line is the person of Jesus Christ. Christians view Jesus as savior, lord,
and king. He is "the way, the truth and the life" (John 14:6). Other worldviews reject
these claims; some even deny the existence of Jesus altogether. Christians maintain that
without the life, death, and resurrection of Jesus Christ for the salvation of the human


<!-- page-9 (book p.17) -->

race, all is lost. As Paul points out, "if Christ has not been raised, then our preaching is
in vain and your faith is in vain" (1 Cor. 15:14).
The teachings of the Bible don't blend well with the non-Christian claims that the uni-
verse is a product of time and chance and that human beings are smart enough and good
enough to save themselves.
"PLATO'S CAVE" READING
Plato (427-347 B.C.) was one of the most famous and influential philosophers of all time.
Many of his writings are dialogues with his mentor, Socrates, as the speaker. The Allegory of
the Cave found in Book VII of The Republic is a discussion between Socrates and Glaucon.
It illustrates many of Plato's philosophical assumptions, including:
• The physical world isn't the real world but only a poor copy
• The real world can only be grasped intellectually
• The universe is ultimately good and beautiful
• Enlightened people have an obligation to enlighten others
• The good society is one in which the truly wise are the rulers
SHADOWS
PLATO'S CAVE
Except from Plato's Republic, Book VII
[Socrates:] Imagine human beings living in an underground, cavelike dwelling, with
an entrance a long way up, which is both open to the light and as wide as the cave itself.
They've been there since childhood, fixed in the same place, with their necks and legs
fettered, able to see only in front of them, because their bonds prevent them from turn-
ing their heads around. Light is provided by a fire burning far above and behind them.
Also behind them, but on higher ground, there is a path stretching between them and
the fire. Imagine that along this path a low wall has been built, like the screen in front
of puppeteers above which they show their puppets.
[Gloucon:] I'm imagining it.
[Socrates:] Then also imagine that there are people along the wall, carrying all kinds of
artifacts that/project above it- statues of people and other animals, made out of stone,
wood, and every material. And, as you'd expect, some of the carriers are talking, and
some are silent.
[Gloucon:] It's a strange image you're describing, and strange prisoners.
[Socrates:] They're like us. Do you suppose, first of all, that these prisoners see anything
of themselves and one another besides the shadows that the fire casts on the wall in front
of them? How could they, if they have to keep their heads motionless throughout life?
What about the things being carried along the wall? Isn't the same true of them?
[Gloucon:] Of course.
[Socrates:] And if they could talk to one another, don't you think they'd suppose that
the names they used applied to the things they see passing before them?"
[Gloucon:] They'd have to.
[Socrates:] And what if their prison also had an echo from the wall facing them? Don't
you think they'd believe that the shadows passing in front of them were talking whenever
one of the carriers passing along the wall was doing so?
[Gloucon:] I certainly do.
[Socrates:] Then the prisoners would in every way believe that the truth is nothing other
than the shadows of those artifacts.
[Gloucon:] They must surely believe that.
[Socrates:] Consider, then, what being released from their bonds and cured of their
ignorance would naturally be like if something like this came to pass. When one of them
was freed and suddenly compelled to stand up, turn his head, walk, and look up toward
the light, hed be pained and dazzled and unable to see the things whose shadows hed
seen before. What do you think hed say, if we told him that what hed seen before was
inconsequential, but that now-because he is a bit closer to the things that are and is
turned towa d things that are more—he sees more correctly? Or, to put it another Way if
we pointed to each of the things passing by, asked him what each of them and compelled
him to answer, don't you think hed be at a loss and that hed believe that the things he
saw earlier were truer than the ones he was now being shown?
[Gloucon:] Much truer.
Socrates:] And if someone compelled him to look at the light itself, wouldn't his eyes
hurt, and wouldn't he turn around and flee towards the things he's able to see, believing
that they're really clearer than the ones he's being shown?
[Gloucon:] He would.


<!-- page-10 (book p.18) -->

Tuz Parati
OF DARKNEES
[Socrates:] And if someone dragged him away from there by force, up the rough, steep
path, and didn't let him go until he had dragged him into the sunlight, wouldn't he be
pained and irritated at being treated that way? And when he came into the light, with
the sun filling his eyes, wouldn't he be unable to see a single one of the things now said
to be true?
[Gloucon:] He would be unable to see them, at least at first.
[Socrates:] I suppose, then, that hed need time to get adjusted before he could see things
in the world above. At first, he'd see shadows most easily, then images of men and other
things in water, then the things themselves. Of these, he'd be able to study the things in
the sky and the sky itself more easily at night, looking at the light of the stars and the
moon, than during the day looking st the sun and the light of ine sam 2 4 treS
[Gloucon:] Of course.
(Socrates:] Finally, I suppose, hed be able to see the sun, not images of it in water or
some alien place, but the sun itself, in its own place, and be able to study it.
[Gloucon:] Necessarily so.
[Socrates:] And at this point he would infer and conclude that the sun provides the
seasons and the years, governs everything in the visible world, and is in some way the
cause of all the things that he used to see.
Gloucon:] It's clear that would be his next step.
(Socrates:] What about when he reminds himself of his first dwelling place, his fellow
prisoners, and what passed for wisdom there? Don't you think that hed count himself
happy for the change and pity the others?
[Gloucon:] Certainly.
[Socrates:] And if there had been any honors, praises, or prizes among them for the one
who was sharpest at identifying the shadows as they passed by and who best remembered
which usually came earlier, which later, and which simultaneously, and who could thus
best divine the future, do you think that our man would desire these rewards or envy
those among the prisoners who were honored and held power? Instead, wouldn't he feel,
with Homer, that hed much prefer to "work the earth as a serf to another, one without
possessions," and go through any sufferings, rather than share their opinions and live
as they do?
Gloucon:] I suppose he would rather suffer anything than live like that.
[Socrates:] Consider this too. If this man went down into the cave again and sat down
in his same seat, wouldn't his eyes—coming suddenly out of the sun like that-be filled
with darkness?
[Gloucon:] They certainly would.
[Socrates:] And before his eyes had recovered —and the adjustment would not be quick-
while his vision was still dim, if he had to compete again with the perpetual prisoners in
recognizing the shadows, wouldn't he invite ridicule? Wouldn't it be said of him that hed
returned from his upward journey with his eyesight ruined and that it isn't worthwhile
even to try to travel upward? And, as for anyone who tried to free them and lead them.
upward, if they could somehow get their hands on him, wouldn't they kill him?
[Gloucon:] They certainly would.
[Socrates:] This whole image, Glaucon, must be fitted together with what we said before.
The visible realm should be likened to the prison dwelling, and the light of the fire inside
it to the power of the sun. And if you interpret the upward journey and the study of
things above as the upward journey of the soul to the intelligible realm, you'll grasp
what I hope to convey, since that is what you wanted to hear about. Whether it's true or
not, only the god knows. But this is how I see it: In the knowable realm, the form of the
good is the last thing to be seen, and it is reached only with difficulty. Once one has seen
it, however, one must conclude that it is the cause of all that is correct and beautiful in
anything, that it produces both light and its source in the visible realm, and that in the
intelligible realm it controls and provides truth and understanding, so that anyone who
is to act sensibly in private or public must see it.
Plato: Republic, translated by G.M.A. Grube, revised by C.D.C. Reeve, Copyright Hackett Publishing Company
1992. Reprinted with permission from the publisher.
TEmPORM
SPRITUAL


<!-- page-11 (book p.21) -->

before
JaSs
"PLATO'S CAVE" DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. Can you summarize Plato's parable of the cave in your own words?
Prisoners from birth, a group of people are forced to live deep underground in a cave.
Their legs and necks have been securely chained, forcing them to face a wall in front of
them. A bright fire shines above and behind, providing the only source of light. Behind
them, their captors lift up various objects. The light from the fire casts shadows of these
objects upon the wall. Unable to turn their heads, the prisoners see these shadows as
the real objects of the world.
Then one day a prisoner is freed. Able to move around, he sees the objects causing the
shadows he had come to accept as real. He struggles to comprehend the distinction
between the objects casting shadows and the shadows themselves. He leaves the cave
and encounters the sun. At first, he is blinded, but as his sight adjusts, he realizes that
this sun is responsible for giving light to the world. By this light he eventually learns to
see the trees, grass, and flowers as they really are. He goes back to his old friends only
to find out that he no longer sees as they see, and he decides he no longer desires their
company because of their differing views.
2. Who do the prisoners represent? What do the shadows represent?
The prisoners represent unenlightened humanity—a picture of everyone who hasn't come
to see the world as it truly is. (For Plato, this would include anyone who hadn't adopted
his unique philosophical form of idealism.)
The shadows represent the distortions of reality that we have come to accept in place of
the truth. Although similar in form, these shadows are merely misrepresentations of the
truth. Their appearances are very similar to the objects from which they emanate, but
they are still illusions nonetheless.
3. Why was the light painful for the newly freed man? What was Plato's point in this
detail?
Anyone who has been awakened from a deep sleep by a bright light can attest that light is
sometimes painful. After an entire lifetime in darkness, the prisoner's sight was suddenly
overwhelmed with the brightness of truth. Frightened and confused, at first the man
retreated back to the darkness he had always known. But as he learned to understand
that he had been misled by the darkness and shadows, he resolved to endure the pain
and accept what was revealed by the light.
The point Plato seems to be making is that it is difficult and painful to reorient our
understanding of reality. It takes time for old views to be replaced with newer ones.
When we are first introduced to this light, it can be so scary that we are often tempted
to ignore what we have just seen and return to the lie we used to believe. As we adjust
our understanding, we struggle, but Plato wanted to show that the journey is worth it
because he believed that discovering truth and living by it is the noblest pursuit of man.
"PLATO'S CAVE" DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
4. What does the sun represent?
The sun is the last element perceived by the freed man. Once he was enlightened, he first
saw the objects themselves. But when he looked up, he saw the origin of all light, which
illuminates the world and allowed him to see the objects as they truly are. (For Plato,
the highest and purest form of reality is the Good. All other elements of reality become
clear by the light of this Good, which is the origin and sustainer of all other things.)
5. Why did the freed prisoner not wish to go back to his former life?
Although at first it might be difficult to accept the truth, once we've understood it, it
is even more difficult to ignore. Even if it were in our own best interest, there is just
something about the way were made that makes it virtually impossible to believe what
we know to be a lie. After discovering the sun, its light, and the objects that cast the
shadows, the former prisoner couldn't return to a world he knew was false. He could no
longer talk about the shadows as though they were real, and he couldn't make himself
care about mere shadows of real things. The former prisoner preferred to live the rest
of his life alone with the truth rather than go back to living in the dark with his friends.
6. Why would the prisoners try to kill anyone attempting to show them the light?
When the freed man returned, he could no longer see the shadows as his companions
saw them. Because his friends knew nothing of his journey to the light or what he tound
there, they could only assume that the journey harmed his vision instead of correcting
it. The former prisoner no longer saw the world as his friends did, and because their
way of seeing was all they'd ever known, they believed his new worldview to be harmful.
This made the prisoners upset with the man. They feared that anyone who saw this light
would eventually return as blind as their lost friend.
7. What is the point of Plato's parable of the cave?
Plato wanted to help his audience begin to ask questions about their beliefs, showing
that the true nature of reality might be different from what weve always believed or
assumed. He encouraged his readers to question, to ask if there is more to reality than
what meets the eye. Though sometimes this kind of learning is painful, and a person
might have to change his or her life to match these new experiences, Plato believed the
truth is worth the struggle.
8. What insights can we glean about worldviews from a parable written more than
2,000 years ago?
People have been thinking about worldview questions for a very long time. It's important
to realize that these questions have been asked and answered in many different ways for
as long as human beings have existed. Learning about how ancient philosophers have
thought can help us understand our roots and answer these questions better for ourselves.


<!-- page-12 (book p.0) -->

"AN INTRODUCTION TO WORLDVIEWS" VIDEO
Eric Smith defines a worldview as "a pattern of ideas, beliefs, convictions, and habits
that help us make sense of God, the world, and our relationship to God and the world."
Worldviews answers life big questions: Why are we here? Does life have meaning and
purpose? Is there right and wrong? Is there a God? Who am I?
In deciding which worldview is true, we can apply four tests of truth:
1. Test of reason: Is it reasonable? Is it consistent and not self-refuting?
2. Test of the outer world: Is there some external, self-corroborating evidence to
support it?
3. Test of the inner world: Does it adequately match what we experience in our
world?
4. Test of the real world: Are its consequences good or bad when applied in any
given cultural context?
To access this video, go to www.summitu.com/utt and enter the passcode found in the back
of your manual.
"AN INTRODUCTION TO WORLDVIEWS" VIDEO OUTLINE
worldview
helps us make sense of the world we live in. We live in a
world of ideas about what is right and wrong, how we should live, and so on. We don't
have to memorize every grouping of ideas. We can look for patterns. Everything can be
categorized into worldviews and we can see the world that way.
What is a worldview?
pattern
of ideas, beliefs, convictions, and habits that help us make
sense of God, the world, and our relationship to God and the world.
What does a worldview do?
It answers life's big questions:
• Does_
life
• Is there right and wrong?
• Is there a
God
• Who am I?
have meaning and purpose?
Ideas can be collected into six different worldviews. These worldviews shape our ideas,
habits, and identity. Habits, the things we do on a regular basis, shape and reinforce who
we are. They reinforce the ideas we believe in.
Which worldview is true?
Four tests of truth:
1. Test of
reason
_ : Is it reasonable? Can it be logically stated and de-
fended? Is it consistent and not self-refuting?
2. Test of the _
outer
_ world: Is there some external, self-corroborating
evidence to support it? Worldviews that claim to have roots in history, such as
Christianity and Islam, must be corroborated by external evidence.
3. Test of the _
inner
world: Does it adequately match what we experi-
ence in our world? How does something line up with what we think and feel?
4. Test of the
real world: Are its consequences good or bad when
applied in any given cultural context? History is full of negative examples such
as Marxism and Islam.


<!-- page-13 (book p.25) -->

"AN INTRODUCTION TO WORLDVIEWS" DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. What is a worldview?
A worldview is a pattern ofideas, beliefs, convictions, and habits that help us make sense
of God, the world, and our relationship to God and the world. We live in a world ofideas
about what is right and wrong, how we should live, and so on.
We don't have to memorize every grouping of ideas. We can look for patterns. Everything
can be categorized into worldviews and we can see the world that way. Ideas can be col-
lected into six major worldviews. These worldviews shape our ideas, habits, and identity.
2. What does a worldview do?
A worldview answers life's big questions:
• Does life have meaning and purpose?
• Is there right and wrong?
• Is there a God?
• Who am I?
Every worldview answers these questions differently based on the ideas and presuppo-
sitions that underpin them. We must not only look at the roots (ideas and beliefs) of a
worldview but of the fruit it produces. What kind of people and societies does it produce
when lived out in the real world?
Which worldview is true?
Truth can be understood in two ways: with our minds (Romans 12:2) and with our hearts
(Hebrews 4:12). We believe truth can be tested in at least four ways. These tests can be
applied to worldviews to determine their truthfulness:
1. Test of reason: Is it reasonable? Can it be logically stated and defended? Is it con-
sistent and not self-refuting?
2. Test of the outer world: Is there some external, self-corroborating evidence to
support it? Worldviews that claim to have roots in history must be corroborated
by external evidence.
3. Test of the inner world: Does it adequately match what we experience in our world?
How does something line up with what we think and feel?
4. Test of the real world: Are its consequences good or bad when applied in any
given cultural context?
- L4 -
"AN INTRODUCTION TO WORLDVIEWS" DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
4. How does the "test of the outer world" apply to worldviews and religions?
If a worldview or religion claims to have its roots in history like Judaism, Christianity,
Islam, or Mormonism, the events upon which they are based must be corroborated by
external evidence. Is there objective extrabiblical evidence for things like the exodus, the
giving of the law to Moses, the resurrection of Jesus, the dealings of Mohammad, and
American history as described by Mormonism?
Some worldviews like Secularism or Postmodernism aren't concerned with history or
factual events. They are more focused on belief systems and subjective attitudes.
5. How does the "test of the real world" apply to worldviews?
The test of the real world looks at what happens when a worldview is lived out. What
kind of people or society does it produce and does the fruit match what the worldview
promises? Are its consequences good or bad when a worldview is applied in any given
cultural context?
In the twentieth century, several worldviews were lived out on a national or international
scale. Did Marxism in Russia, China, Cuba, or the other countries where it was tried
produce the utopia promised by Marx in The Communist Manifesto? Has Secularism
has a positive or negative impact on American culture? Has New Spirituality brought
higher consciousness and world peace?
Jesus said, "By their fruits you shall know them" (Matthew 7:20, NKJV). This is a great
test to apply evenhandedly to all worldviews, including the one you personally hold.
Nothing human will be perfect, but which worldview most closely produces what it
promises to deliver?


<!-- page-14 -->

Chapter 1 Key Points
Key Questions:
1. What is a worldview?
2. Why is it important to
study worldviews?
Key Verses:
1. Roman 12:2
2. 1 Peter 3:15
Key Terms:
1. Biology
2. Economics
3. Ethics
4. History
5. Law
6. Philosophy
CHAPTER 1 AssIGNMENT
7. Politics
8. Psychology
9. Religion
10. Sociology
11. Theology
12. Worldview*
Short answer or essav auestion on the exam
Hello!
Well, I'm finally settled into my dorm room. You wouldn't think that it would take so long to move
into a room the size of a closet, but when you're sharing that space with a roommate, you have to be
creative.
My roommate, Nathan, is really interesting. After noticing my Bible, he mentioned that he is taking a
World Religions class this semester. It sounded like a fascinating class, so I signed up too! My course load
this semester is fairly light since it is my first semester and all. In addition to World Religions, I am taking
English Composition, Art History, Economics, and Basket Weaving. (Don't laugh!)
Yesterday was the first day of classes. I was really nervous, but I got through it. My World Religions
professor is hilarious. He dresses like a hippie and even brought a ukulele to class. It will probably be
my most fun course this term. When he began his lecture, he asked each of us to say what religion, if
any, we believe in. Many of the students said they believed in Christianity, but a number of them held
to Islam, Judaism, and even atheism. Nathan said he was "into spirituality, but I have no idea what he
meant by that. I'll have to ask him sometime.
Anyway, back to the lecture. The professor gave a brief rundown of what he called the major
"worldviews" Despite my confusion, everyone seemed to understand what that meant, so I didn't ask
since I didn't want to look ignorant. He proceeded to say that by the end of the semester, most of the
professed Christians would believe something different. Needless to say, I was shocked. After class, I
asked the professor why he expected that to happen. We talked for a while before the professor asked
me if I thought Christianity was the only way to God. I answered yes, since Christianity is the only
religion that acknowledges Jesus as both God and Savior. The professor proposed a different view. He
thought that all religions ultimately lead to God. He argued that ultimately religions are just different
paths to the same destination. I stammered out a short reply, saying that not all religions believe in
Jesus, but it didn't seem to satisfy him. He asked what I knew about other religions, and l admitted that
I did not know much. The last thing he said has really had me thinking the last few days. He said, "If you
don't know what other religions believe, then how do you know that other religions don't lead to God as
well?" I didn't know what to say.
Id like to be able to defend my faith to him, but the questions he asked made me wonder if l've
thought through my beliefs carefully. My professor said he's open to talking about Christianity, but I
don't think I know just how to explain it to him. Can you help me figure out what to say? What is a
worldview? Can you also explain to me why should we study worldviews? I mean, I know l
should since he pointed out how little I know, but I don't know if I could really say why. He's interested in
learning about my beliefs, but what does it mean to have a Christian worldview?
Well, it's already past midnight, so l'd better get some sleep. I have a class at 8 a.m. tomorrow and
can't skip breakfast if I want to have my brain awake that early!
One last thing ... do you know why you are a Christian? I know I am, but after my
conversation with the professor, I am not sure I know why l am. Just curious.
-Doug
UNIT1•
