# Chapter 3

<!-- page-1 (book p.3) -->

UNIT
CHAPTER 3 LEARNING OBJECTIVES
Students will be able to:
1. contrast the difference between radical and moderate Islam. [3.2-3.3]
2. identify what characterized the early history of Islam and the differences between
the three main factions of Islam. [3.4]
3. explain why Islam is a worldview. [3.5]
4. state what Islam teaches about the nature of God, the Bible, Jesus, salvation, and
judgment. 3.
5. define what Islam teaches about general revelation. [3.7]
6. explain the sources of special revelation for Islam, what Islam says about humanity,
what Islam says is wrong with us, and what Islam says about how we should live. [3.8]
7. discuss how Islam views other worldviews. [3.9]


<!-- page-2 -->

CHAPTER 3
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. In your opinion, the nineteen Muslims who used planes to brutally kill nearly three
thousand innocent people were what?
[Write some of the following options on the board: cowardly, courageous, devoted to God,
deluded, intelligent, insane, martyrs, and murderers. Discuss their answers.]
One religion's murderers may be another religion's martyrs. When someone's faith is
misplaced, the more extreme their faith the more they feel justified in doing unspeakable
things and to think they are right in doing so. This is the case with the Muslim hijackers.
They put their faith into action at the cost of their own lives, but devotion and self-
sacrifice don't make them right. Nor does the fact that they were Muslims mean that
all who share their religion share their radical interpretation of the Quran, or approve
of what they did.
It's wrong to judge an entire religion by the behavior of a few zealots, but it's also dangerous
to ignore the latent violence in a religion's teachings. The concept of jihad that motivated
the hijackers has some dangerous implications for America and the West. (See the question
on jihadis.)
2. What are some distinctions between moderate and radical Muslims? [3.2]
Radical Muslims want to establish a global Islamic state by whatever means necessary,
including terrorism. Moderate Muslims are committed to their faith and traditions, but
are also open to economic ties with the West. They would rather be part of the modern
world than destroy it.
Radicals Muslims aren't always on the lunatic fringe of society. According to research,
radicals
• are less likely to attend religious services;
• earn more money and are better educated than moderates;
• express more satisfaction with their financial situation;
• are as likely as moderates to appreciate the West's technology and democracy.
What makes them radical is the belief that the West threatens and attempts to control
their way of life. Radical Muslims are a small minority in Islam—around seven percent—
but that still means there are more than one-hundred million radical Muslims in the
world today.
UNIS
Chapter 3.1 Activity
SEPTEMBER 11, 2001
Objective: Students will fill out a KWL chart and write a letter from a future grandchild telling
about life in 2101 with Islam as the only worldview.
• Time Required: 15-30 minutes for the KWL, and 30-45 minutes for the letter
1. For this chapter and the following four chapters on worldviews, start the lesson with stu-
dents making a KWL chart (Know already about the topic, Want to learn about the topic,
Learned as a result of the lessons. Have students write the letters K, W, L at the top of their
paper. Direct them to list below the K what they already know about Islam and what they
want to learn about Islam under the W. Collect the papers and use them as your guide for
discussions on topics the students desire deeper understanding. At the end of the chapter,
return the papers to the students and have them fill in the L section to show what they have
learned about the Islamic worldview.
2. Explain your personal recollections of September 11, 2001, and how that day impacted your
life.
3. Point out that 316 years earlier on that date the Islamic worldview was not prevalent in the
world. Have students imagine that 100 years from that date the Islamic worldview has been
adopted by all people as the only worldview. Challenge students to postulate how their
grandchildren's lives in 2101 would be different from their own life right now. Remind them
how a worldview can impact daily habits, family traditions, employment choices, financial
decisions, and hobbies or recreational choices.
4. Mention that their grandchildren have just heard that your generation had a Christian
worldview.
5. Have students write a letter from their imaginary grandchild describing life in 2101, ask-
ing questions about the Christian worldview and what happened that allowed the Islamic
worldview to become dominant.


<!-- page-3 (book p.55) -->

What makes a radical a radical? Are some religions more likely to produce radicals
than others? [3.2]
A radical is someone who takes misplaced faith to extremes and commits to drastic
political, economic, or social action to achieve his misplaced aims. Radical Muslims
believe they have to destroy the West before it destroys them. There can be no coexistence.
The use of terrorist tactics—including suicide bombers—seems justified to them because
they face a larger, more powerful enemy.
Islam and Christianity are similar in many ways. What makes them different? The source
of their truth. In the case of Islam, it's the Quran. In the case of Christianity, it's the
Bible. The further people go in the Quran the more they are encouraged to implement
Muhammad's teachings through force. The further people go into the Bible the more
they are encouraged to implement Jesus' teachings through love.
0/25
Start
Can the Islamic worldview coexist with other worldviews? [3.3]
Islam is a theistic worldview centered on the life of the prophet Muhammad that derives
its understanding of the world through the Quran and other holy books. It is a pattern of
ideas, beliefs, convictions and habits that inspire a system of practices by which Muslims
believe they demonstrate submission to Allah.
Muslims vary in how they perceive and respond to the Islamic worldview. Some are
"culturally" Islamic. They follow Islamic practices but they can get along with non-Muslims
and can live in societies that are not Islamic. Others are "Islamists" who believe the full
application of shariah law should be enforced on everyone. They reject coexistence; their
goal is to convert all opposition, or in the case of those we have call jihadis, to conquer it.
5. Some experts make a distinction between Muslims and Islamists. These two groups
believe the same book-the Quran—so what makes them different? [3.3]
Muslims identify with Islamic culture and try to follow its practices, but they can coexist
with non-Muslims and take part in secular society without feeling the need to radically
change it. Islamists are radical fundamentalists who believe society should be governed
by shariah law, the moral code outlined in the Quran and other teachings.
This attitude toward shariah law is the key dividing line between Muslims and Islamists.
This law is barbaric by modern standards. It accepts slavery, the physical abuse of wives,
heavy taxation of non-Muslims living in Muslim lands, and even the killing of Muslims
who convert to another faith.
(taxation)
Muslims and Islamists also differ on the doctrine of jihad. Muslims see jihad as defensive
in nature, protecting themselves and their faith from outside attack. Islamists see jihad
as converting or conquering unbelievers. Islamists who have "weaponized" their beliefs
and are committed to destroying the West are often called jihadis or jihadists
Chapter 3.2 Activity
RADICAL VERSUS MODERATE ISLAM
Objective: Students will list reasons why Muslims might move to your community and evalu-
ate whether the reasons are based on their Islamic worldview or personal benefit
• Time Required: 15-30 minutes for the KWL, and 30-45 minutes for the letter
1. Discuss the following sentence from the text talking about the majority of Muslims: "They
hope for more people to convert to Islam, but they have little interest in establishing a
global Islamic state if it is going to involve violence or the tearing down of the structures of
democracy from which they have obtained personal benefit." Key in on the fact that per-
sonal benefit can be classified as selfishness, a trait all people are born with, and affects the
level they adhere to their worldview.
2. Have students work with a partner to brainstorm a list of reasons why moderate Muslims
from the Middle East might move to your community or a larger community nearby. If
students need guidance, suggest they consider reasons like schooling, job opportunities,
or global expansion of the Islamic worldview. Guide pairs to evaluate their lists of reasons
and write if each reason is based on the Islamic worldview or personal benefit. Then rate
each reason on a scale of 0-5 (0 is low and 5 is high) to indicate relative importance of each
reason.
3. Let each pair share their lists and evaluations. Ask pairs whether worldview or personal ben-
efits were the most popular reasons to move to your community. Have them analyze the re-
sults and give their thoughts on how dedicated to Islam Muslims really are. Ask the students
to describe how that affects/will affect their actions in your community.
4. Point out that the list of reasons from a radical Muslim would be different. Have students
discuss those differences.


<!-- page-4 (book p.57) -->

How do you feel when you hear the word "jihad"? What is jihad and where does the
idea come from? [3.3]
The word "jihad" strikes fear into many hearts as it conjures up images of collapsing
buildings and gruesome beheadings. Jihadis or jihadists are Islamists who take up arms
to impose their faith upon others. They believe in using violence and terror against
non-Muslims in the service of Allah. They are an army of zealots committed to doing
whatever it takes to destroy America and the West.
Jihad means to fight against non-Muslims until Islam conquers the entire world. It is taught
in the Quran and applies to all Muslims. (There are 164 verses in the Quran addressing
jihad and virtually all of them employ warlike language.) Moderate or cultural Muslims
reinterpret the meaning of jihad as a form of personal discipline, or they just ignore the
concept all together. They don't take part in terrorism, but most don't speak out against
it either: Jihadis believe violence and terror are necessary in dealing with nonbelievers,
who must be converted or killed.
7. Islam means "submission" and a Muslim is "one who submits" to Allah. But what
does this submission look like? [3.4]
Submission to Allah is embodied in the ummah, the worldwide community of Muslims.
The ummah exerts enormous pressure on individual Muslims to remain in the community
and behave in an acceptable fashion. It is a long tradition of ideology, commands, cultural
practices, and societal norms: children are subject to adults, women to men, families to
community leaders, and community leaders to the Islamic state. To break away from
ummah is to be alienated and lost.
9/25 vl
Activity
Start
8. How did Islam get started and how large has it grown? [3.4]
The founder of Islam, a merchant named Muhammad, was born around AD 570 in
Mecca, in modern day Saudi Arabia. When he was about forty, he began seeing visions
he thought were demonic but that he later accepted as messages from God delivered
by the angel Gabriel. Muhammad was commissioned to be a prophet of God and spent
the next twenty-three years transmitting the message orally into what was eventually
compiled and written down—the Quran. Muslims consider the Quran to be the most
pure understanding of God. "Quran" means to "read" or "recite."
Muhammad believed Islam was God's final revelation to humankind, surpassing those
given earlier to the Jews and Christians. His message was simple:
• There is one God, Allah, who made all things.
• All people must submit to him.
• There will be a day of judgment when all will be judged by their deeds and rewarded
or punished accordingly.
Muhammad gathered followers, raided caravans to amass wealth, and eventually con-
quered large parts of the Middle East. He died in AD 632.
In the centuries since, Islam has grown to include nearly one-fourth of the world's
population. Current estimates put the number of Muslims at around 1.6 billion. The
majority of Muslims are not Arabs and nearly half of them live in just four countries:
Indonesia, Pakistan, India, and Bangladesh.
Chapter 3.3 Activity
SHOULD WE BE AFRAID?
Objective: Students will work in groups to make a Venn diagram comparing radical/moderate
Muslims and radical/moderate Christians.
• Time Required: 15-30 minutes
1. Point out that just as Islam has radical and moderate, or name only, Muslims the same can
be found among Christians.
2. Divide the class into four groups and assign each group one of the following topics to create
a Venn diagram comparison: (a) radical Muslim/secular Muslim (b) radical Christian/name
only Christian (c) radical Muslim/radical Christian (d) secular Muslim/name only Christian.
3. Have each group present their Venn diagram to the class. After each group has presented,
have students evaluate the items in the center of each Venn diagram and note any conclu-
sions about similarities.
9. What are some key events in the life of Muhammad and early Muslim history? [3.4]
In danger in Mecca, Muhammad fled to Medina in AD 622, an event known as Hijra.
The Hijra began the Muslim era and begins the Islamic calendar today. Muhammad
won significant battles and eventually captured Mecca in AD 629. He entered the city
and cleansed the Kaba of its idols. From then on, Mecca became the most holy place to
the Muslim faith.


<!-- page-5 (book p.39) -->

Islam spread through military conquest and within one hundred years controlled parts
of Europe, the Middle East, and North Africa. When Muhammad died in AD 632, three
caliphs (successors) took his place. Later, Ali ibn Talib, Muhammad's son-in-law, took
power. The murder of Ali in AD 661 began a conflict that still divides Muslims. Those
who think the successor should be elected by popular vote became the Sunni Muslims.
The Shiite Muslims believe the successor should be from Muhammad's bloodline.
10. What are the three main divisions of Islam? [3.4]
Sunni Muslims, currently about 80 percent of Muslims, believe Muhammad's successor
should be elected by popular vote.
Shiite Muslims believe Muhammad's successor should be a direct descendant of the
prophet. Without a living prophet, Shiites look to leaders called imams. They believe
imams are gifted by Allah to guide them. (Sunnis also have imams, but they are more
lay leaders.)
Sunnis and Shites agree on the importance of the Quran, but acknowledge different
other collections of Muhammad's sayings and teachings.
Sufi Muslims arose later as a reaction to the worldliness its followers believed was taking
over Islam as it grew in wealth and power. Unlike Sunnis and Shites, Sufis believe that
Allah has a personal and mystical nature. They advocate a personal experience and
oneness with Allah that sometimes borders on pantheism. The result is a less legalistic
form of Islam.
Start Th 9/27
11. Does Islam recognize a distinction between the spiritual and the secular? [3.5]
No. Like most other worldviews, Islam embraces all areas of life.
Islam does not divide life into domains of the spiritual and the secular. It spiritual-
izes the entire existence of man and produces a social movement to reconstruct
human life in the light of principles revealed by God. ... That is why Islam is not a
religion in the limited sense of the word; rather it is a complete code of life and a
culture-producing factor. ... In Islam you can't eat a la carte, you have to take the
whole menu. (Urbain Vermeulen)
12. Why is conformity important and individualism dangerous to Islam? [3.5]
When you have God's own words spoken directly through his chosen prophet, interpreted
by trained scholars, and reinforced by the whole community (ummah), there's no room
for personal opinion. Uniformity is paramount. Freethinking is dangerous because it can
lead to disagreement and division. It can also result in unwanted reform and innovation.
The danger of such unthinking allegiance is trust it can lead to groupthink and idolatry.
Chapter 3.5 Activity
ISLAM IS A WORLDVIEW
Objective: Students will list reasons why Islam is a worldview and not just a religion.
• Time Required: 30-45 minutes
1. Inform students they will make a list of reasons why Islam is a worldview and not just a reli-
gion. At the end of the class, they will receive a point for each idea they have that no else in
the class wrote down.
2. Guide students to research and write down what constitutes a religion.
3. Have them make a list of reasons why Islam is a worldview and not a religion. Allow them to
do some research online and to list any references quoted or used.
4. Allow time for each student to share his or her list of reasons. As students hear the lists, have
them cross out any duplicate ideas they wrote down. Direct the class to vote on whether an
item on the list is unique or accurate. Award the winner extra credit points.
13. Is Christianity just as susceptible to groupthink and idolatry?
In some ways, yes. Christians also look to God's Word as divinely inspired and authoritative.
They trust respected scholars, and rely the living community (church) for direction on
how to apply it to daily life. But here's the difference. The Bible emphasizes loving God
with one's mind, being prepared to give an answer, and not being held captive by wrong
philosophies. The church has been reformed and renewed through the ages as a result
of godly men and women seeking to understand and apply God's Word to their times.
That healthy process continues today.


<!-- page-6 (book p.61) -->

14. What are some beliefs the Islamic and Christian worldviews have in common? [3.6]
1. Monotheism and a hatred of idolatry
2. A personal Creator who interacts with his creation
3. A holy book given by God through his chosen messengers
4. The importance of living one's life in submission to God
5. A coming day of judgment when all will be judged for their deeds and rewarded
or punished accordingly
15. What does Islam teach about the nature of God? [3.6]
Muslims worship "Allah." This is the Arabic word for God, not the name of God. He is
eternal, self-existent, transcendent, and all-powerful. He spoke the universe into existence
and is the sovereign over all creation. He created humans-but not in his image-and
gave then free will. They are responsible for their actions and will one day be judged.
Allah relates to people only through the prophets and authoritative teachings.
Islam strongly rejects the Christian doctrine of the Trinity. The idea of one God in three
persons is viewed as shirk (the sin of polytheism). Obviously, Muslims also deny the
deity of Jesus Christ.
16. What does Islam teach about the Word of God? [3.6]
Islam teaches that Allah communicated his will to humans through a series of prophets,
twenty-five of whom are named in the Quran. Some Old and New Testaments prophets
are on the list, including Moses, David, and Jesus. But when Allah communicated the
Quran to Muhammad, this was his final word.
The Quran is the only authoritative and uncorrupted scripture preserved without error. It
supersedes all other holy books, including the Bible, just as Islam supersedes and fulfills
all other religions, including Christianity. But the message of Islam differs substantially
from the Christian message, especially when it comes to the gospel of Jesus Christ. Islam
doesn't fulfill Christianity; it seeks to replace it.
17. What does Islam teach about Jesus? [3.6]
Muslims believe in the virgin birth and miracles of Jesus, but they don't believe he was
divine, or that he died for the sins of the world, or that he rose from the dead. (The Quran
teaches that Jesus wasn't actually killed; it only appeared that he died on the cross.) Islam's
respect for Jesus as a holy prophet falls far short of revering him as the Son of God and
savior of humanity. It also runs counter to the clear teaching of the Bible:
Being found in human form, he humbled himself by becoming obedient to the
point of death, even death on a cross. (Phil. 2:8)
Christ died for our sins in accordance with the Scriptures, that he was buried, that
he was raised on the third day in accordance with the Scriptures. (1 Cor. 15:3-4)
If Christ has not been raised, then our preaching is in vain and your faith is in vain.
... For if the dead are not raised, not even Christ has been raised. And if Christ has
not been raised, your faith is futile and you are still in your sins. (1 Cor. 15:14, 16-17)
Chapter 3.6 Activity
BASIC ASPECTS OF THE ISLAMIC WORLDVIEW
Objective: Students will work in a small group to write three true statements and one false
statement about their assigned aspect of the Islamic worldview.
• Time Required: 15 minutes
1. Divide the class into five groups and assign each group one of the aspects of the Islamic
worldview: the nature of God, the Bible, Jesus, salvation, and judgment.
2. Have each group create a list of three truths and one false statement about their topic.
3. Invite each group to present their list and have the rest of the class vote on which item is the
false statement. Award 10 points for stumping the entire class.
start Man 1%1
18. What does Islam teach about salvation? [3.6]
Islam sees Jesus as one of many distinguished prophets whose words are helpful for
living a good life. But he is not the savior, not a payment for sin, and not raised from
the dead and seated in heaven, the first fruits of the resurrection. He is not "the way, the
truth and the life" (John 14:6).
Each person must bear his own burden and be responsible for his own actions,
because no one can expiate for another's sin. (Abdalati


<!-- page-7 (book p.63) -->

The Quran gives the image of a balance: good deeds weighed against bad. If a person's
good deeds outweigh the bad, he or she will likely receive Allah's mercy. A good person
does not automatically enter paradise; it's the mercy of Allah, not the deeds of man, that
opens the doors of heaven. Allah has not promised salvation to those who do good deeds,
but good deeds make paradise more likely. However, Allah has guaranteed paradise to
all those martyred in jihad (Sura 4:74).
19. What does Islam teach about the final judgment? [3.6]
The creation account in Genesis is accepted by Muslims, but they don't believe in the
fall (Gen. 3:17, Rom. 8:19-23). Without a fall, there is no need for redemption and a
redeemer in Islam. Humanity is able to advance Allah's agenda on their own through
political means. After this life, everyone's deeds will be weighed in the balance.
The weighing on that day [day of resurrection] will be the true [weighing]. So as
for those whose scale [of good deeds] will be heavy, they will be the successful [by
entering paradise]. And as for those whose scale will be light, they are those who
will lose their own selves [by entering hell] because they denied and rejected Our
Ayat [proofs, evidences, verses, lessons, signs, revelations]." (Quran 7:8-9)
There is still a need for Allah's mercy and grace, as Muhammad said, "None of you would
get into Paradise because of his good deeds alone, and he would not be rescued from Fire,
not even I, but because of the Mercy of Allah." However the emphasis is on performing
good works as outlined in the Five Pillars of Islam.
20. Islam and Christianity use a similar argument for the existence of God from general
revelation; what is it? [3.7]
The Islamic version of the argument is called the Kalam cosmological argument. Kalam
is Arabic for "discourse," and cosmology is the study of the order, structure, and design
of the universe. The argument goes like this: Everything that begins has a cause. The
universe began. The universe was caused.
The Kalam argument is a horizontal (linear) form of the cosmological argument.
The universe is not eternal, so it must have had a Cause. That Cause must be con-
sidered God. This argument has a long and venerable history among such Islamic
philosophers as Alfarabi, Al Ghazali, and Avicenna. (Norman Geisler)
The cosmological argument points to a first cause, but it doesn't reveal much about the
nature or character of the creator. Nor does it address life's ultimate questions. For that
we need special revelation. The Quran provides this for Muslims while the Bible serves
the purpose for Christians. Let's ask the same five questions of Islam we asked of Chris-
tianity in the previous chapter to see the differences in worldviews:
• On what sources of revelation does Islam draw?
• What does Islam say about humanity?
• What does Islam say is wrong with us?
• What does Islam say about how we should live?
• How are we to understand other worldviews based on Islam?
21. On what sources of revelation does Islam draw? [3.8]
The Quran (from the verb qara'a, "to read" or "to recite") is the incomparable, infallible,
and final revelation from God (Quran 10:37; 46:12). The Quran was dictated word for word
to the prophet Muhammad over twenty-three years through the angel Jibril (Gabriel). It
completes and supersedes all previous revelations such as the Old and New Testaments.
Earlier teachings and prophets like Moses, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, and Jesus are understood
by Muslims as having been originally Islamic and Muhammad is their successor. The
prior prophets were for a specific time and place, but Muhammad is the one prophet for
all humankind (Quran 7:158; 34:28) as well as the final prophet (33:40).
The other major source for Islamic theology is the Hadith. The Hadith is a collection of
traditions about the teachings, rulings, and actions of Muhammad and his followers. It
includes the Sunnah, descriptions of Muhammad's lifestyle, and a prescription for exemplary
action. These sources are viewed by Muslims as authoritative and divinely inspired by Allah.
22. What does Islam say about humanity? [3.8]
Muslims acknowledge humans as Allah's "vice regents" on earth but reject the imago Dei
("image of God"). Muslims see humans as slaves of Allah, not his sons and daughters.
Although God breathed into man his spirit, as both Christians and Muslims believe,
for Islam the only divine qualities entrusted to humans as a result of God's breath
were those of knowledge, will, and power of action. If people use these divine quali-
ties rightly in understanding God and following his law strictly, then he has nothing
to fear in the present or the future, and no sorrow for the past. (Badru Kateregga)
23. What does Islam say is wrong with us? [3.8]
When Adam and Eve disobeyed Allah's original prohibition, their mistake (not sin) was
quickly forgiven. Their mistake, however, resulted in humans rebelling against Allah,
who later sent Islam to give humanity a way back to its pristine state.
Muslims believe every human being is born a Muslim in a state of submission to Allah.
But from very early on, we are led astray to worship false gods or to deny Allah alto-
gether. To stay in this state is to be in rebellion against Allah. Muslims are obliged to


<!-- page-8 -->

battle rebellion against Allah through jihad. Internally, jihad involves resisting tempta-
tion and developing virtue. Externally, jihad is the battle against all who oppose Islam.
Fighting against non-Muslims is an act of restoration—the offering of Allah's mercy to
those willing to end their rebellious ways. Some call this second aspect of jihad "holy war."
In the Muslim community, the holy war is a religious duty, because of the univer-
salism of the [Muslim] mission and [the obligation to] convert everybody to Islam
either by persuasion or force. (In Khaldun)
In areas dominated by Islam, there is a provision called dhimmitude in which Chris-
tians and Jews ("people of the Book") may live in peace without converting to Islam. As
dhimmis, though, Christians and Jews are officially second-class citizens and must pay
the jizyah (the tax upon unbelievers).
24. What does Islam say about how we should live? [3.8]
In Islam, what you do is more important than what you believe. Muslims have five basic
requirements they must perform, popularly known as the Five Pillars of Islam:
1. Shahada, the confession of faith: "There is no God but Allah and Muhammad
is his prophet." If a person pronounces this confession with sincerity, then he or
she is a Muslim. To believe in God and Muhammad as his prophet is to obey the
Quran and follow the example of Muhammad.
2. Salat, prayer: Muslims are to pray five times a day, facing Mecca. On Friday, men
(and, in some cases, women) are to meet at a mosque at noon to pray. Prayer
provides a daily rhythm to Muslim life.
3. Zakat, almsgiving: Muslims are to give 2.5 percent of their annual capital to the
poor. This is to foster a generous lifestyle and a sense of caring for fellow Muslims,
especially those in physical and financial difficulties.
4. Sawm, fasting during Ramadan: This involves refraining from food, smoking, and
sexual relations during daylight hours. These periods of fasting are to encourage
Muslims to develop self-control and to refocus their minds toward spiritual
progress.
5. Hajj, pilgrimage: At least once in their lifetime, if finances and health permit,
Muslims are to journey to Mecca. During their pilgrimage, they don white
garments and remove all indicators of status to help them recognize that all are
equal before God.
Those Muslims we are referring to as Islamists add a sixth pillar, jihad—compelling non-
Muslims to cease their rebellion against God; Islamists who die in jihad are guaranteed
a place in Paradise.
25. What are the sources of Islamic law and practice? [3.8]
Quran: The Quran "specifies prohibitions on certain foods, a number of legal rules
concerning family law, criminal law, rules about witnesses, and commercial regulation
including the ban on riba (interest) and forms of contracts." This law is called shariah.
Sunnah: Muslim legal scholars use the Sunnah to discern the shape of shariah. This
body of material contains many more legal rulings and examples than the Quran. But
it also contains several conflicting, even contradictory examples arising from different
places and times.
Ijma: In addition to the Quran and the Sunnah, a third source for understanding shariah
Law is the communal consensus called ijma, expressed among Muslim jurists of the first
three centuries of Islam.
Finally, there are "legal reasonings" that address situations not dealt with elsewhere.
26. What is the principle of abrogation, and how does it create problems for modern
Muslims? [3.8]
The principle of abrogation means that later passages in the Quran overrule (abrogate)
earlier passages. The problems is that the peaceful, merciful nature of Allah presented
in the first part of the Quran is replaced by a version of Allah with a noticeable sense
of revenge and bloodlust in the second part of the Quran. This can encourage devout
Muslims to become more aggressive and violent.
27. How does Islam relate to other worldviews? [3.9]
There is little room for dissention or disagreement within Islam, and no room for
accommodation of opposing worldviews. Submission to Allah (Islam) is not optional:
those who choose not to submit are in danger of subjugation or death; those who leave
it are in danger of their lives.
Earlier tolerance of other faiths (Judaism and Christianity in particular) ended with the
completion of the Quran. Now, "If anyone desires a religion other than Islam, never will
it be accepted of him; and in the Hereafter he will be in the ranks of those who have lost
[all spiritual good!" (Quran 3:85).
Some Muslim scholars have explored the possibility of adjusting the Quran in keeping
with modern times, but these efforts are rejected by most Muslims. Thus, the conflict
between Islam and other worldviews will likely continue.
28. Do you know any Muslims or have any Muslim friends? If so, have you talked about
your different worldviews? Do you care to share about those conversations?
[Answers will vary.


<!-- page-9 -->

Chapter 3.9 Activity
HOW ARE WE TO UNDERSTAND OTHER WORLDVIEWS BASED
ON ISLAM?
Objective: Students will participate in a Socratic seminar to show comprehension of this
chapter.
• Materials Needed: none
• Time Required: 30-45 minutes
1. Have everyone bring a question about the material studied to class or write one at the
beginning of class. Encourage students to write open-ended questions or opinion-based
questions that do not have a right or wrong answer.
2. Divide your class in two equal groups. Arrange the chairs in an inner circle for one group and
an outer circle for the other group. Explain the way you will conduct the Socratic seminar. If
unfamiliar with this style of discussion, check online or follow/modify these suggestions: (a)
The inner circle students are the discussion participants and the outer circle students listen
and take notes. (b) Students can use class notes but not the textbook. (c) During the dis-
cussion students can ask other questions and direct those questions to other students. (d)
Students in the outer circle take notes, and when it is their turn to be in the inner circle, they
should reference the previous participants and their points made. (e) You should step back
and observe, and only step in if the discussion stalls, and it is time to move on to another
question or to solicit responses from students who are not participating. (g) The discussion
should focus on the chapter topic and encapsulate information learned throughout the chap-
ter. (h) The goal is to see where the discussion goes and for everyone to participate equally.
3. Select a question to begin the discussion.
4. Halfway through the class time, have the inner and outer circle students switch places.
5. If you are grading this activity, give points for participation, use of facts from the text and
class discussions, notes taken, and students rating their own performance and participation.
6. Distribute students' KWL charts filled out at the start of this chapter. Have them fill in the L
column to show several things they learned about Islam as a result of studying and discuss-
ing the text.
SURA 3 AND 4 READING
Sura 3:187-200 discusses how Allah gave purpose to the world when he created it. These
verses also give support to jihad, teaching that those who are slain for Allah's sake will be saved
from their sins. The section concludes with a charge to persevere in order to have success.
Sura 4:64-104 is often cited in support of jihad. Those who are slain for Allah's sake will be
saved from their sins and those Muslims who do not fight in the name of Allah are ques-
tioned as to their faithfulness. Hell is mentioned as a warning for those who do not believe
and heaven is promised to those who fear Allah.
As you read, consider what the Bible says on the subjects of heaven, hell, the day of resur-
rection and success, what it is and how do we achieve it.
Proverbs
9:10
To access this reading, go to www.summitu.com/utt and
enter the passcode found in the back of your manual.
h7-


<!-- page-10 (book p.69) -->

SURA 3 AND 4 DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. What does Allah promise to those who have fought and suffered in his name?
Whatever is endured for the sake of Allah in this life will be amply rewarded in the next.
The faithful who suffer will receive forgiveness of sins and admittance to paradise. Sura
3:195 says:
Those who have left their homes, and were driven out therefrom, and suffered harm
in My cause, and fought and were slain, —verily I will blot out from them their
iniquities, and admit them into Gardens with rivers flowing beneath;-a reward
from the presence of Allah and from His presence is the best of rewards.
Verses like this are the basis for jihad, which can mean a holy war waged on behalf of
Islam as a religious duty but also a personal struggle in devotion to Islam involving
spiritual discipline.
2. What does the Quran teach about the afterlife?
Islam teaches there is a heaven and a hell. Heaven is a beautiful garden in the presence
of Allah. Hell is a place of burning fire away from Allah's presence. Where people wind
up depends on whether they believe in and serve Allah:
Let not the strutting about of the Unbelievers through the land deceive thee: (196)
Little is it for enjoyment; their ultimate abode is Hell: what an evil bed (to lie on)!
(197) On the other hand, for those who fear their Lord, are Gardens with rivers
flowing beneath: therein are they to dwell (for ever) a gift, — from the presence of
Allah; and that which is in the presence of Allah is the best (bliss) for the righteous.
(Sura 3:198)
[As a follow up question, ask your students how this is different from what the Bible teaches
about heaven and hell?]
3. How will Jews and Christians be treated by Allah?
The People of the Book (Jews and Christians) who reject the Covenant with Allah will be
punished in hell, but those who believe in Allah will be saved, even if they don't practice
the disciplines required of obedient Muslims:
And there are, certainly, among the people of the Book, those who believe in Allah,
in the revelation to you, and in the revelation to them, bowing in humility to Allah:
they will not sell the signs of Allah for a miserable gain! For them is a reward with
their Lord, and Allah is swift in account. (3:199)
SURA 3 AND 4 DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
4. 5.
The media has a lot to say about "jihad," but what does the Quran actually teach
about it?
Those who fight and die in the cause of Allah will receive great rewards in his presence
(Sura 3:195).
Those who fight in the cause of Allah —whether they live or die—will be greatly rewarded
in the next life (Sura 4:74).
Those who don't fight for Allah are fighting in the cause of evil (Sura 4:76).
Those who fight in the cause of Allah will receive a greater reward than those who stay
home (Sura 4:95).
Do you think these teachings require Muslims to be more militant about their faith than
other religions?
According to the Quran, what is the source of good in the world? What is the source
of evil?
Allah is the creator of the world and the source of all the good in it (Sura 3:187-191).
While all that is good comes from Allah, all evil is of human origin. Those who obey
Allah do good; those who follow their own hearts do evil.
Whatever good, (O man!) happens to thee is from Allah; but whatever evil hap-
pens to thee is from thyself. And We have sent thee, as a Messenger to (instruct)
mankind: And enough is Allah for a witness. (Sura 4:79)
[As a follow up question, ask your students how similar this is to what Jews and Christians
believe about good and evil?]


<!-- page-11 (book p.71) -->

"A CLOSER LOOK AT ISLAM" VIDEO
Alan Shlemon begins with 2 Corinthians 5:18-20, which says we are Christ's ambassadors
and that our mission is to reconcile the world to Christ. He explains how we can do this
with Muslims by having a better understanding of Islam. He explains the three sources
of authority in Islam: The Quran, the Hadith and the Sunnah.
Next he briefly explains the Five Pillars of Islam, which are required behavior for Muslims:
reciting the Creed, daily prayer, the fast of Ramadan, giving alms, and the pilgrimage to
Mecca. Shlemon then expands on the Six Articles of Faith, which are required beliefs for
Muslims: Belief in the unity of Allah, belief in Allah's angels, belief in Allah's prophets,
belief in Allah's books, belief in the final judgment, and belief in divine destiny.
"A CLOSER LOOK AT ISLAM" VIDEO OUTLINE
Three sources of authority in Islam:
Quran
_: The highest authority, the literal words of Allah, dictated
by the angel Gabriel word for word to Mohammed.
Hadith
egorized by subject.
_: written traditions of what Mohammed said or did, cat-
Sunnah
_: The life example of Mohammed, who is the supreme
embodiment of what it means to be a Muslim.
If something is found in these sources it's Islamic. If it isn't found here, it's not Islamic,
no matter what Muslims say.
To access this video, go to www.summitu.com/utt and enter the passcode found in the back
of your manual.
Is violent jihad a valid Islamic doctrine?
• According to the Quran, violent jihad is valid (it contains 164 verses about jihad).
• The Hadith has an entire section called "The Book of
Jihad
• The Sunnah has graphic details of Mohammed's violent actions against unbelievers.
Muslims respond to the reality of jihad in two ways:
1. "I'm not violent. Most Muslims don't practice violence." Therefore, they reason,
Islam doesn't teach violence, but this is in spite of what Islam teaches, not because
of it.
2. "Islam is a peaceful religion that's been hijacked by violent terrorists." The truth
is that Islam is a violent religion that's been hijacked by peaceful people.
Five Pillars of Islam, which are required behavior:
1. Reciting the _
Creed
_: "There is no God but Allah and Mohammed
is his prophet."
2. Daily prayer: Five times a day facing Mecca
3. Fast of _
Ramadan
_: Month-long fast from dawn to dusk
4. Giving alms: 2.5 percent of income given to poor and needy
5. Pilgrimage to .
Mecca
. once in a lifetime: Greatest deed a Muslim
can do


<!-- page-12 (book p.73) -->

'A CLOSER LOOK AT ISLAM" VIDEO OUTLINE
"A CLOSER LOOK AT ISLAM" DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
Six Articles of Faith, required beliefs:
1. Belief in the unity of -
2. Belief in Allah's angels
3. Belief in Allah's prophets
4. Belief in Allah's books
5. Belief in the final.
6. Belief in divine destiny
Allah
judgment
1. What are the three key sources of authority in Islam?
There is a difference between what Muslims say about their religion and what Islam
teaches as authoritative. The main sources of Islamic teaching:
The Quran is the highest authority in Islam, not simply inspired, but the literal words of
Allah. The Quran exists in heaven and was dictated word for word by the angel Gabriel
to Mohammed over the course of twenty-two years.
The Hadith is the written traditions of what Mohammed said or did, categorized by
subject. It addresses and illustrates broad practices and basic principles touched on in
the Quran. It is authoritative but not on par with the Quran.
The Sunnah contains the life example of Mohammed, who is the supreme embodiment
of what it means to be a Muslim.
If something is found in these sources, it's Islamic. If it isn't found here, it's not Islamic,
no matter what Muslims say.
2. Is violent jihad a valid Islamic doctrine?
The Quran contains 164 verses about jihad, many of them involving violence. This is
understandable when you consider that Mohammed was involved in fighting much of
his life. Surah 9, a final message, is extremely violent.
The Hadith teaches violent jihad. It has an entire section called "The Book of Jihad," which
is very detailed and lists many capital crimes. The Sunnah also has graphic details of
Mohammed's violent actions against unbelievers. He raided caravans for spoils, fought
battles, and ordered assassinations, including the beheading of 600-700 Jewish men.
Mohammed's followers continued the violence. In the century after his death, Islam
expanded by violent means. The conquered were given three choices: Convert to Islam,
pay an expensive poll tax, or fight to the death.
3. How do modern Muslims respond to violent jihad today?
Many Muslims claim that groups like ISIS and terrorist acts like 9/11 are not Islamic.
They insist that Muslims don't violently force their religion on everyone. They respond
to the reality of jihad in two ways:
"I'm not violent. Most Muslims don't practice violence." Therefore, they reason, Islam
doesn't teach violence, but this is in spite of what Islam teaches, not because of it.
"Islam is a peaceful religion that's been hijacked by violent terrorists." The truth is that
Islam is a violent religion that's been hijacked by peaceful people. (See question 2.)


<!-- page-13 (book p.75) -->

"A CLOSER LOOK AT ISLAM" DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
4. What practices are required of all Muslims?
All Muslims are required to practice the Five Pillars of Islam:
1. Reciting the Creed (Shahada): "There is no God but Allah and Mohammed is
his prophet."
2. Daily prayer (Salat): Praying five times a day facing Mecca, because the Kaaba
is there.
3. Fast of Ramadan (Sawm): Month-long fast from dawn to dusk. This commemorates
the receiving of the Quran.
4. Giving alms (Zakat): 2.5 percent of one's income must be given to poor and needy.
5. Pilgrimage to Mecca once in a lifetime (Hajj: This is the greatest deed a Muslim
can perform.
5. What beliefs are required of all Muslims?
All Muslims are required to believe the Six Articles of Faith:
1. Belief in the unity of Allah (Surah 112): To believe anyone else is God is an
unpardonable sin, such as the Trinity or the divinity of Jesus. Allah and Jehovah
are not different names for the same God.
2. Belief in Allah's angels: They administer his kingdom. The angel Gabriel is the
one who dictated the Quran to Mohammed.
3. Belief in Allah's prophets: Every people group has their prophets, which include
Moses, David, and Jesus, but Mohammed is the greatest prophet.
4. Belief in Allah's books: There are four divine revelations that Muslims accept: The
Quran, the Torah, the Psalms and the Gospels. Only the Quran has remained free
from corruption; the other three books can't be trusted because they have been
corrupted.
5. Belief in the final judgment: Allah will judge all people according to their deeds,
which are recorded by angels. This is a merit-based system of salvation.
6. Belief in divine destiny: Everything that happens is by the divine decree of Allah.
There is no free will; everything that happens is Allah's will and can't be resisted
or thwarted.
* 14-
Chapter 3 Key Points
Key Questions:
1. What are
the tenets of
the Islamic
worldview?
Key Works:
1. The Hadith
2. The Quran
Key Terms:
1. Dhimmitude
2. Dhimmi
3. Hadith
4. Hajj
5. Islam*
6. Islamist
7. Jihad
8. Jihadi
9. Jizyan
10. Salat
11. Sawm
12. Shite Islam
13. Shahada
14. Shariah Law
15. Shirk
16. Sufi Islam
17. Sunnah
18. Sunni Islam
19. Ummah
20. Quran
21. Zakat
*Short answer or essay question on the exam


<!-- page-14 (book p.77) -->

CHAPTER 3 ASSIGNMENT
Hello again!
As the semester is moving forward, my homework is piling up and classes are getting a lot harder.
I thought taking a Basket Weaving elective would be a piece-of-cake class, but / was definitely wrong.
Don't laugh at me. It's been a lot of work!
As part of our freshman orientation, we had to attend a cultural event last weekend. It did interfere
with intramural practices, but it was also very interesting. We went to a Middle Eastern gathering where
they showcased the food, dress, and traditions of Islam. Most of the food was really good, and it was
neat to see how another culture lives.
I sat next to Muhammad, a student I recognized from one of my classes. He told me he grew up a
Muslim in the Middle East. When we started talking about Islam, I realized how little I really knew. All I
knew was that the attacks of 9/11 were carried out by radical Muslim terrorists, so | guess my mindset
towards the religion was initially jaded. I asked Muhammad if he agreed with the 9/11 bombings, and
he shook his head emphatically and told me he wasn't "that kind" of Muslim. I didn't know there was
more than one kind, so I asked him what kind of Muslim he was.
He told me that he was a normal Muslim who follows the five pillars of Islam, lives closely in line
with the Quran, and obeys Allah so he can earn his eternal salvation. I nodded my head in feigned
comprehension as I pretended not to be completely ignorant about Islam (which I was), knowing that
Id probably learn about everything from the guys leading this cultural event. But unfortunately for me,
this was more of an event for the Muslim students on campus and not a chance to learn about religion.
I learned a bit about clothing and food, but they didn't really "teach" me anything about Islam, per se.
I'm still kind of confused about the whole thing. I wonder if could you help me?
First off, what is a Muslim, and what are the five pillars of Islam? I've heard of Allah, but I
don't really know what the difference is between the Muslim god and the Christian God. What does
Islam teach about the nature of God and human beings? Muhammad mentioned that he
believes all the biblical prophets are considered prophets of Islam, including Jesus. Can that be right?
What does Islam really teach about the Bible and Jesus? He said following the Quran would
get you into paradise. What does Islam teach about salvation? | feel really ignorant about the
subject.
Well, it's late, so I should go to bed. But thanks for your help! I hope you're doing well!
Bye!
-Doug
