# Chapter 5

<!-- page-1 (book p.5) -->

CHAPTER 5 LEARNING OBJECTIVES
Students will be able to:
1. explain the history behind Marxism and its founder, Karl Marx and why it is im-
portant to study Marxism. [5.1]
2. cite examples of how Marxism is still active in the world today. [5.2]
3. name the two key ideas that Marxism teaches. [5.3]
describe why Marxism is a worldview. [5.4]
identify why evolution is integral to Marxism. [5.5]
6. detail how Marxism responds to the ultimate questions: what are the key sources
for Marxism, what does Marxism say about humanity, what Marxism says is wrong
with us, and what Marxism says about how we should live. [5.6]
7. give an example of how Marxism views each of the other worldviews. [5.7]
explain why Marxism entails violence. [5.8]


<!-- page-2 (book p.103) -->

CHAPTER 5
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
Can you summarize Marxism in a few sentences? [5.1]
Marxism is an atheistic and materialistic worldview based on the writings of Karl Marx.
Marxism promotes the abolition of private property, public ownership of the means of
production, and the utopian dream of a future communistic state.
2. How does Marxism understand communism, socialism, and capitalism? [5.1]
Communism is Marx's word for the society that implemented his ideas on government
and the economy. It's from the Latin communis: -common, universal. Communism
is based on common ownership of the means of production and the absence of social
classes. A communist society is socialistic.
Socialism is the abolition of private property. It's a political and economic approach that
holds that the means of production, distribution, and exchange should be owned by the
community as a whole. In socialism, everyone owns everything.
Capitalism is an economic system in which the means of production and distribution
are owned by private citizens. Prices and wages are determined by competition and the
market forces of supply and demand rather than by government decree.
3. Both Christianity and Marxism are named after their founders. The life of Jesus was
central to his message. How about Marx? Did he practice what he preached? [5.1]
Not at all. For more than thirty years, he lived in England, one of the most capitalistic
countries ever. He never took the slightest personal risk to see his ideas implemented.
He couldn't even manage his own family or finances, living off the largess of others. He
took advantage of his own servant and never worked in a factory nor did physical labor.
4. What is the key document of communism? Does it advocate peaceful coexistence or
violence? [5.1]
The Communist Manifesto, published in 1848 with the help of Frederick Engels, is "red
in tooth and claw" to borrow from Tennyson. It states:
The Communists disdain to conceal their views and aims. They openly declare that
their ends can be attained only by the forcible overthrow of all existing social con-
ditions. Let the ruling classes tremble at a communist revolution. The proletarians
[working class] have nothing to lose but their chains. They have a world to win.
In the last century, more than one hundred million people were killed under Communist
regimes:
• 20-60 million in the Soviet Union
• 40-70 million in China
• 2 million in Cambodia
• 1.6 million in North Korea
• 1.2 million in Yugoslavia
Chapter 5.1 Activity
A ZOMBIE WORLDVIEW BACK FROM THE DEAD
Objective: Students will fill out a KWL chart and participate in an activity to demonstrate
Marx's view of the unfairness between economic classes.
• Materials Needed: computer or paper and pencil
1. Start the lesson by guiding students to make a KWL chart (refer to activity 3.1). Have stu-
dents write the letters K, W, L at the top of their paper. Direct them to list below the first two
letters what they already know about Marxism and what they want to learn about Marxism.
Collect the papers and use them as a guide for discussions on topics the students desire to
understand better.
2. Select about one-fourth of the students to stand near the front of the room facing the board
and direct the rest of the class to line up at the back of the room. Place a wastebasket in
front of the board.
3. Give each student a sheet of the same size paper. Have them crumble the paper. Explain that
each student will have only one turn to shoot his or her crumbled paper from where he or
she is standing into the wastebasket. The students who achieve getting their paper into the
wastebasket will be the "factory owners in a pre-Marxist society" or the "haves," and those
students who fail to throw their paper into the wastebasket will be the "factory workers in a
pre-Marxist society" or the "have nots."
4. Allow each student one throw. Discuss the students' reactions to the activity and what they
notice about the results. Refer back to this demonstration throughout this chapter to help
students identify with Marx's ideas about inequality and capitalism.


<!-- page-3 (book p.105) -->

- 10% -
5. Is Marxism a political idea of the past or an ongoing threat today? [5.2]
Almost 20 percent of the world's population lives under communist regimes. There are
five communist nations: China, Vietnam, Laos, North Korea, and Cuba. Millions of
people live in socialist countries like Bangladesh, India, Sri Lanka, Portugal, Tanzania,
and Guyana. And many countries have powerful socialistic factions, including France,
Greece, Venezuela, Sweden, Zambia, Syria, Norway, Libya, and Algeria.
One current version of communism is referred to as state capitalism. What is it and
where can it be found today? [5.2]
The Economist summarized state capitalism as the practice of federal governments tak-
ing ownership and management control of private businesses. Though the companies
still operate in the private marketplace, they do so with state capital and power. Tax
revenues are collected and distributed under compulsion and other possible economic
choices are excluded.
State capitalism can be found in countries like Russia, China, and the United States!
Recently, our federal government has made aggressive moves in the health care, energy,
and banking sectors of the economy that can be accurately described as state capitalism.
7. Are you likely to run into Marxists on college campuses? [5.2]
The Socialist Worker newspaper is distributed on many campuses, and various leftist groups
will be active and vocal. You'll find some professors overtly evangelistic about Marxism and
others sympathetic to Marxist ideologies. These ideas may permeate lectures, textbooks,
and reading lists. Leading academics, like Martha Gimenez at the University of Colorado,
promote Marxism as the proper framework through which to understand society:
We are, in Marx's terms, "an ensemble of social relations" and we live our lives at
the core of the intersection of a number of unequal social relations based on hier-
archically interrelated structures which, together, define the historical specificity of
the capitalist modes of production and reproduction and underlay their observable
manifestations. (Martha Gimenez)
8. Two central pillars of Marxism are dialectical materialism and economic determinism.
Can you give a brief definition of each? [5.3]
Dialectical Materialism: A view of history that says the way people see the world and
act on it (thesis) causes a reaction to change how things are done (antithesis). The an-
tithesis then becomes the norm. The interplay of thesis and antithesis creates a new way
of seeing (synthesis), which becomes a new thesis, and the cycle continues.
Materialism in Marxism says that only physical matter exists. There is nothing outside
of nature.
Economic Determinism: The view that economics is the foundation for all of society. Ev-
erything-politics, religion, law, and culture—can be explained by the economic struggle
between the bourgeoisie (the property owners) and the proletariat (the property-less
workers).
No matter the surface issues, the true struggle is one of economics. Economics
ultimately determines the entire course of history.
Chapter 5.3 Activity
WHAT MARXISM TEACHES
Objective: Students will create television commercials to explain the two key ideas of Marxism.
• Materials Needed: computers, cell phones or video cameras with record and play-back function
• Time Required: 30-45 minutes
1. Divide the class into four or six groups to create a 30-second TV commercial explaining ei-
ther dialectical materialism or economic determinism. Assign a topic to each group.
2. Have groups brainstorm what point they want to make about the topic and how to best
communicate that point in just 30 seconds. Each group should film the commercial in a for-
mat that can be shown to the entire class.
3. Show the dialectical materialism commercials and discuss the similarities in the commercials
and the effectiveness of the messages. Then show the economic determinism commercials
and discuss them.
9. Could you be a good Marxist and believe in God? [5.3]
Materialism and atheism are non-negotiable in Marxism.
In our evolutionary conception of the universe, there is absolutely no room for
either a creator or a ruler. (Frederick Engels)
The problem of Communism is not an economic problem. The problem of Com-
munism is the problem of atheism. (Feodor Dostoevsky)
We have every reason to believe that sooner or later, we shall be able practically
to demonstrate that life is nothing else but a special form of existence of matter.
(A. I. Oparin)


<!-- page-4 (book p.107) -->

10. Where does socialism begin and where does it lead? [5.3]
Socialism begins with heavy taxation, government takeover of businesses, and the elimi-
nation of laws protecting private property. Eventually the government won't be needed
because economic classes will cease to exist and the means of production will be owned in
common. This enlightened state is called communism, which means "working in common."
Communism is the goal of socialism. To Marxists, socialism is the first step toward this
perfect economic system. For this transition to happen, many existing institutions and
ideas have to be swept away, including the following:
• Religion
• Capitalism
• Democracy
• Personal rights and freedoms
• Private property
• Free markets
Violence and conflict are part of the economic revolution to get rid of these injustices
and bring about class equality. To Marxists, this is the inevitable course of human history.
11. According to Marxism, history can be understood and explained by the drive to
eliminate what? [5.4]
Economic injustice. Every aspect of society is affected by the inevitable conflict between
the ruling economic class (owners) and the oppressed economic class (workers). Those
with economic power use it to exploit those without it. The battle is all-inclusive to
Marxists, which is why they want to harness every academic discipline and put it to
work fomenting revolution.
12. What role does evolution play in Marxist ideology? [5.5]
Evolution is fundamental to Marxism because it offers a viable alternative to divine
creation and a divine creator.
The idea of the creation of the earth has received a severe blow ... from the sci-
ence which portrays the ... development of the earth as a process of spontaneous
generation. ... Generatio equivoca [spontaneous generation] is the only practical
refutation of the theory of creation. (Karl Marx)
Darwin put an end to the notion of the species of animals and plants as "divine
creations," not connected with anything else, providential and immutable, and
thus laid the foundation of theoretical biology. (F. V. Konstantinov)
But evolution isn't just biological; Marxists believe it's also sociological. As Marx stud-
ied Darwin, he became convinced that evolution explained human progress as well as
the survival of the fittest in nature. Marx saw human beings and their civilizations as
continually evolving toward communism—a utopian society devoid of social classes,
government, private property, and religion.
13. On what sources does Marxism draw for ideas and inspiration? [5.6]
The primary document for Marxism is The Communist Manifesto. Commissioned by the
Communist League and written by Marx and Engels, the Manifesto lays out a course of action
for a proletarian revolution to overthrow capitalism and to bring about a classless society.
Michael Hardt and Antonio Negri updated The Communist Manifesto in a book called
Empire, published in 2000. Four years later, they published the follow-up work, Multitude,
which called for people to rise up and attack capitalism. They have also written a third
volume, Commonwealth, to explain how they would govern the revolution by holding
wealth in common.
14. What does Marxism believe about humanity? [5.6]
Human beings are the product of nature and in a constant state of change. Humans are
nothing more than matter in motion, always evolving and hopefully growing in "class
consciousness." The awareness of their oppressed state by the working class will lead
to a new ethic—a proletariat morality that justifies whatever it takes to overthrow the
existing social status quo. Based on proletariat morality, hardcore Marxists admitted that
destroying the bourgeoisie was a sacred duty.
Our cause is sacred. He whose hand will tremble, who will stop midway, whose
knees will shake before he destroys tens and hundreds of enemies, he will lead the
revolution into danger. Whoever will spare a few lives of enemies, will pay for it with
hundreds and thousands of lives of the better sons of our fathers. (Nikita Khrushchev)
Proletariat morality believes that whatever advances the cause of communism is morally
Ki"
good and whatever hinders comiue poon is morally evil. The most moral behavior in avances
Marxism is advancing the cause of the proletariat.
million ppl
Communism.
15. Why did many communist countries allow for freedom of worship in their
constitutions? [5.6]
The inclusion of the freedom of worship in their constitutions was window dressing to
deflect criticism of the severe religious repression they enforced. Even so, freedom of
worship isn't the same as freedom of religion. While the freedom of worship might allow
people to assemble for public services, it doesn't allow them to live out and promote their
religious convictions in a lawful manner.
Tolerance for a diversity of ideas, beliefs, and lifestyles has never been part of the Marxist
makeup. And there's no hesitation in using force to ensure contormity.


<!-- page-5 (book p.109) -->

Chapter 5.6 Activity
SPECIAL REVELATION: HOW MARXISTS ANSWER THE UL-
TIMATE QUESTIONS
Objective: Students will write a brief Marxism 101 booklet that covers the ultimate questions
of special revelation.
• Materials Needed: computer or paper and pencil
• Time Required: 30-45 minutes
1. Discuss basic information books students have read, such as Psychology 101 or Programming
for Dummies and why they are popular.
2. Identify the four questions related to special revelation in this section of the textbook. Have
students work individually or in pairs to create a brief Marxism 101 booklet that addresses
each of the questions.
3. Encourage volunteers to share their booklets with the class.
16. What does Marxism say is wrong with us? [5.6]
Marxism rejects the Christian view that humans are sinful by nature and in need of a
savior. The exploiters alone are guilty, and there is no salvation aside from their overthrow,
which will lead to societal transformation.
The problems with humans in particular and society in general can be reduced to eco-
nomics. Marx says that in a capitalist society, the bourgeoisie equate personal worth with
exchange value, leading to "naked, shameless, direct, brutal exploitation." Marxists see
the human problem in black and white-property owners are evil, and the property-less
workers are saintly.
17. What does Marxism say about how we should live? [5.6]
Evolution will inevitably take humanity toward socialism all the way to communism.
Humans should work to spark the revolution and establish communism. Those who do
will become free; those who resist will be destroyed. Furthering this process includes
abolishing private property, eliminating class divisions, and overthrowing capitalism.
Government exists only to protect the oppressors (bourgeoisie). Once they have been
overthrown by the working class and property is held in common, there will no longer
be a need for government.
Only in Communist society when the resistance of the capitalists has been com-
pletely broken, when the capitalists have disappeared, when there are no classes ...
only then the State ceases to exist. (Vladimir Lenin
This utopian dream has turned out to be a nightmare in countries that have followed
socialism into communism.
18. How does Marxism relate to Christianity? [5.7]
Christianity and Marxism couldn't be further apart. Marx believed that religion in
general and Christianity in particular was, "the opium of the people." He saw Chris-
tianity as defending the oppressors, justifying slavery, and living for the next world,
not this one.
[Christianity preaches] self-contempt, abasement, submissiveness and humbleness,
in short, all the qualities of the rabble, and the proletariat, which will not permit
itself to be treated as rabble, needs its courage, its self-confidence, its pride and
its sense of independence even more than its bread. (Karl Marx)
Some Christians who see God's concern for the poor in Scripture are sympathetic to
Marxism, but the two worldviews are fundamentally at odds.
19. How does Marxism relate to Secularism? [5.7]
Marxism and Secularism agree on many things:
• God doesn't exist.
• Religion is harmful.
• The material world is all there is.
• Human nature isn't fallen.
• Socialism is the best economic policy.
Secularist leaders like John Dewey believed socialism was the best economic system.
The cause of liberalism will be lost for a considerable period if it is not prepared to
go further and socialize the forces of production, now at hand, so that the liberty
of individuals will be supported by the very structure of economic organization...
socialized economy is the means of free individual development as the end. (John
Dewey)
One key difference: While many secularists are sympathetic toward Marxist goals,
they don't agree with the violent methods Marxists are willing to use in bringing about
communism.


<!-- page-6 -->

Chapter 5.7 Activity
CONCLUSION
Objective: Students will participate in a worldview expo.
• Materials Needed: none
1. Review section 2.8 in the textbook and discuss how Christianity viewed Secularism and
Marxism.
2. Explain that today there is a worldview expo taking place in your classroom. Set up five cen-
ters or desks around the room where each of these worldviews is represented: Christianity,
Secularism, New Spirituality, Islam, and Postmodernism. Select a student or two to be the
"experts" on those worldviews.
3. Direct the rest of the class to be Marxists who visit the expo. Guide the Marxists to interact
and to ask questions of the "experts" but not to be argumentative.
4. Afterward, discuss some of the conversations that took place. Have students give their opin-
ions on the interactions at the expo.
20. How does Marxism relate to New Spirituality? [5.7]
Marxism rejects spirituality and religion in any form because these support human
freedom and draw energy away from anti-capitalist fervor. Marxism denies transcendent
reality, which New Spiritualists hold sacred. The violence and aggression promoted by
Marxism are seen by New Spiritualists as a manifestation of negative energy and ego.
Marxism and New Spirituality share a mutual respect for the philosopher Friedrich Hegel.
Marx and Engels got their dialectic approach to history from him, but Hegel also wrote
about the Over-Soul, the Soul of Nature, which resembles the New Spirituality belief in
higher consciousness.
21. How does Marxism relate to Islam? [5.7]
Muslims see their economic approach as a middle way between capitalism and social-
ism. Economic justice requires economic well being for all believers. To accomplish this,
Islam mandates:
• zakat (almsgiving for the poor)
• jizrah (taxes levied on unbelievers)
• laws regarding inheritance
Islamic economics rejects socialism's negation of private property, but also rejects capi-
talism's unlimited freedom of private property.
Within the framework of a set of ground rules, individual (economic) freedom
should be guaranteed, but the state should be allowed to regulate it in cases where
the exercise of individual freedom becomes inconsistent with social welfare. (Syed
Nawab Haider Naqvi
22. How does Marxism relate to Postmodernism? [5.7]
Postmodernism is as post-Marxist as it is post-everything-else. While Postmodernism
seems to have emerged out of Marxism, a Marxist website, League for the Fifth Interna-
tional, identifies seven aspects of Postmodernism it says Marxists must reject. It focuses
primarily on Postmodernism's suspicion of scientific thought and the inevitability of
communism.
While Postmodernism and Marxism agree in rejecting religious narratives, they are
at odds when it comes to science. Postmodernism denies science's ability to discover
objective truth, and Marxism tries to use science-for example, evolution—to support
its ideas about history and social structures.
23. Is it possible for Marxism to achieve its goals without violence? [5.8]
No. Violence is not an unwanted byproduct of Marxism; it is central to its agenda.
The Communists disdain to conceal their views and aims. They openly declare
that their ends can be attained only by the forcible overthrow of all existing social
conditions.... Of course, in the beginning, this cannot be effected except by means
of despotic inroads. (Karl Marx)
To bring about communism, everyone must submit to the principles of Marxism: prop-
erty owners, government officials, the clergy, and so on. All who resist must be destroyed
because all who oppose the progress of the proletariat are evil. Violence is the only way
to force everyone to comply. This is why Marxist revolutions are always accompanied
by bloodshed.
- -


<!-- page-7 (book p.6) -->

Christian ethics are seen as a tool of oppression by Marxists, but their ethics have led to
the oppression and death of millions. Marxism is perhaps the most violent, oppressive,
and murderous system of thought ever constructed, a system hundreds of times worse
than the injustices it is supposed to rectify.
Chapter 5.8 Activity
CONCLUSION
Objective: Students will make a Venn diagram to compare and contrast Marxism and Christi-
anity on the issues of how to gain power and how to deal with the issue of injus-
tice or inequality among people.
• Materials Needed: Bible concordance and other biblical reference materials, computer or
paper and pencil
1. Distribute the students' KWL charts filled out at the start of this chapter. Have them fill in the
L column to show several things they learned about Marxism as a result of studying and dis-
cussing the text.
2. Guide students to use biblical reference materials to look up what God's Word says about
how a Christian should gain power and deal with the issue of injustice or inequality.
3. Direct students to make a large Venn diagram on their papers and label one circle Marxism
and the other circle Christianity. Mention that they should use their textbooks to fill in the
Marxism circle and their Bibles to fill in the Christianity circle. Have them find specific verses
to back up each point they make in the Christianity circle.
4. Remind them to fill in the overlap of the circles with any points that both Marxism and
Christianity share.
5. Invite volunteers to display and explain their Venn diagrams with the class.
God commands his people to care for the poor. The early church was known for its
practical love and compassion for the poorest in society: slaves, the sick and dying, wid-
ows and orphans. But the church also included the rich and powerful, and they weren't
required to get rid of all their worldly goods.
See also: Deut. 15:7, Psa. 140:12, Luke 12:33, 1 Tim. 6:18.
Common property: Acts 2:44-45; 4:32-35
The selling of property to help those in need is voluntary, not forced. Christian
giving is to be free, joyful, and open-hearted. Also note, this example in Acts isn't
repeated in other places as the church expanded.
See also: Prov. 19:17, Acts 20:35, Heb. 13:16, 2 Cor. 9:7, 1 John 3:17.
Everyone must work: 2 Thessalonians 3:10-12
Hard work is a good thing, and the motivation for hard work is that we will be rewarded
according to our efforts. But not everyone can work all the time. And some, like widows
and orphans, may always need financial assistance.
See also: Prov. 6:10-12; 14:23, 1 Cor. 10:31, Col. 3:23.
24. Can you make a case for socialism from the Bible? Doesn't God command us to care
for the poor, to sell our property for the sake of those in need, to work hard and not
rely on society to care for us?
Care for the poor: James 1:27


<!-- page-8 (book p.10) -->

"THE COMMUNIST MANIFESTO" READING
Today's reading is from The Communist Manifesto, the most famous Marxist document ever
written. It discusses the basic reasons for the development of the Communist Party and de-
scribes the communist philosophy of history. The problems of the world are reduced to the
class struggle of the bourgeois (upper class), versus the proletariat (lower class).
The second part of The Communist Manifesto (see below) is more radical than the first.
It advocates the abolition of private property, the abolition of inheritances, the abolition
of religion, the confiscation of the property of all emigrants, and implementation of a
heavy tax. All these propositions are aimed at destroying the bourgeois class and making
all classes equal. Perhaps the most radical intention is to destroy the family as it exists in
capitalist countries.
As you read the list of principles essential to communism at the end of the section, think
about the liberties it seeks to take away and compare what the Christian worldview says
about these liberties.
A SELECTION FROM THE COMMUNIST MANIFESTO
by Karl Marx and Frederick Engels
II. Proletarians and Communists
In what relation do the Communists stand to the proletarians as a whole?
The Communists do not form a separate party opposed to the other working-class
parties.
They have no interests separate and apart from those of the proletariat as a whole.
They do not set up any sectarian principles of their own, by which to shape and
mould the proletarian movement.
The Communists are distinguished from the other working-class parties by this only:
1. In the national struggles of the proletarians of the different countries, they
point out and bring to the front the common interests of the entire proletariat,
independently of all nationality.
2. In the various stages of development which the struggle of the working class
against the bourgeoisie has to pass through, they always and everywhere
represent the interests of the movement as a whole.
The Communists, therefore, are on the one hand, practically, the most advanced and
resolute section of the working-class parties of every country, that section which
pushes forward all others; on the other hand, theoretically, they have over the great
mass of the proletariat the advantage of clearly understanding the line of march, the
conditions, and the ultimate general results of the proletarian movement.
The immediate aim of the Communists is the same as that of all other proletarian par-
ties: formation of the proletariat into a class, overthrow of the bourgeois supremacy,
conquest of political power by the proletariat.
The theoretical conclusions of the Communists are in no way based on ideas or
principles that have been invented, or discovered, by this or that would-be universal
reformer.
They merely express, in general terms, actual relations springing from an existing
class struggle, from a historical movement going on under our very eyes. The aboli-
tion of existing property relations is not at all a distinctive feature of communism.
All property relations in the past have continually been subject to historical change
consequent upon the change in historical conditions.
The French Revolution, for example, abolished feudal property in favour of bour-
geois property.
The distinguishing feature of Communism is not the abolition of property generally,
but the abolition of bourgeois property. But modern bourgeois private property is
the final and most complete expression of the system of producing and appropriat-
ing products, that is based on class antagonisms, on the exploitation of the many
by the few.
In this sense, the theory of the Communists may be summed up in the single sen-
tence: Abolition of private property.
We Communists have been reproached with the desire of abolishing the right of
personally acquiring property as the fruit of a man's own labour, which property is
alleged to be the groundwork of all personal freedom, activity and independence.
Hard-won, self-acquired, self-earned property! Do you mean the property of petty
artisan and of the small peasant, a form of property that preceded the bourgeois
form? There is no need to abolish that; the development of industry has to a great
extent already destroyed it, and is still destroying it daily.
Or do you mean the modern bourgeois private property?
But does wage-labour create any property for the labourer? Not a bit. It creates
capital, i.e., that kind of property which exploits wage-labour, and which cannot
increase except upon condition of begetting a new supply of wage-labour for fresh
exploitation. Property, in its present form, is based on the antagonism of capital and
wage labour. Let us examine both sides of this antagonism.
To be a capitalist, is to have not only a purely personal, but a social status in produc-
tion. Capital is a collective product, and only by the united action of many members,
nay, in the last resort, only by the united action of all members of society, can it be
set in motion.


<!-- page-9 (book p.117) -->

Capital is therefore not only personal; it is a social power.
When, therefore, capital is converted into common property, into the property of
all members of society, personal property is not thereby transformed into social
property. It is only the social character of the property that is changed. It loses its
class character.
Let us now take wage-labour.
The average price of wage-labour is the minimum wage, i.e., that quantum of the
means of subsistence which is absolutely requisite to keep the labourer in bare ex-
istence as a labourer. What, therefore, the wage-labourer appropriates by means
of his labour, merely suffices to prolong and reproduce a bare existence. We by no
means intend to abolish this personal appropriation of the products of labour, an
appropriation that is made for the maintenance and reproduction of human life,
and that leaves no surplus wherewith to command the labour of others. All that we
want to do away with is the miserable character of this appropriation, under which
the labourer lives merely to increase capital, and is allowed to live only in so far as
the interest of the ruling class requires it.
In bourgeois society, living labour is but a means to increase accumulated labour.
In Communist society, accumulated labour is but a means to widen, to enrich, to
promote the existence of the labourer.
In bourgeois society, therefore, the past dominates the present; in Communist society,
the present dominates the past. In bourgeois society capital is independent and has
individuality, while the living person is dependent and has no individuality.
And the abolition of this state of things is called by the bourgeois, abolition of in-
dividuality and freedom! And rightly so. The abolition of bourgeois individuality,
bourgeois independence, and bourgeois freedom is undoubtedly aimed at.
By freedom is meant, under the present bourgeois conditions of production, free
trade, free selling and buying.
But if selling and buying disappears, free selling and buying disappears also. This
talk about free selling and buying, and all the other "brave words" of our bourgeois
about freedom in general, have a meaning, if any, only in contrast with restricted
selling and buying, with the fettered traders of the Middle Ages, but have no meaning
when opposed to the Communistic abolition of buying and selling, of the bourgeois
conditions of production, and of the bourgeoisie itself.
You are horrified at our intending to do away with private property. But in your
existing society, private property is already done away with for nine-tenths of the
population; its existence for the few is solely due to its non-existence in the hands
of those nine-tenths. You reproach us, therefore, with intending to do away with a
form of property, the necessary condition for whose existence is the non-existence
of any property for the immense majority of society.
In one word, you reproach us with intending to do away with your property. Precisely
so; that is just what we intend.
From the moment when labour can no longer be converted into capital, money,
or rent, into a social power capable of being monopolised, i.e., from the moment
when individual property can no longer be transformed into bourgeois property,
into capital, from that moment, you say, individuality vanishes.
You must, therefore, confess that by "individual" you mean no other person than
the bourgeois, than the middle-class owner of property. This person must, indeed,
be swept out of the way, and made impossible.
Communism deprives no man of the power to appropriate the products of society;
all that it does is to deprive him of the power to subjugate the labour of others by
means of such appropriations.
It has been objected that upon the abolition of private property, all work will cease,
and universal laziness will overtake us.
According to this, bourgeois society ought long ago to have gone to the dogs through
sheer idleness; for those of its members who work, acquire nothing, and those who
acquire anything do not work. The whole of this objection is but another expres-
sion of the tautology: that there can no longer be any wage-labour when there is no
longer any capital.
All objections urged against the Communistic mode of producing and appropri-
ating material products, have, in the same way, been urged against the Commu-
nistic mode of producing and appropriating intellectual products. Just as, to the
bourgeois, the disappearance of class property is the disappearance of production
itself, so the disappearance of class culture is to him identical with the disappear-
ance of all culture.
That culture, the loss of which he laments, is, for the enormous majority, a mere
training to act as a machine.
But don't wrangle with us so long as you apply, to our intended abolition of bourgeois
property, the standard of your bourgeois notions of freedom, culture, law, &c. Your
very ideas are but the outgrowth of the conditions of your bourgeois production
and bourgeois property, just as your jurisprudence is but the will of your class made
into a law for all, a will whose essential character and direction are determined by
the economical conditions of existence of your class.
The selfish misconception that induces you to transform into eternal laws of nature
and of reason, the social forms springing from your present mode of production
and form of property-historical relations that rise and disappear in the progress
of production - this misconception you share with every ruling class that has pre-
ceded you. What you see clearly in the case of ancient property, what you admit in
the case of feudal property, you are of course forbidden to admit in the case of your
own bourgeois form of property.


<!-- page-10 -->

Abolition [Aufhebung] of the family! Even the most radical flare up at this infamous
proposal of the Communists.
On what foundation is the present family, the bourgeois family, based? On capital,
on private gain. In its completely developed form, this family exists only among the
bourgeoisie. But this state of things finds its complement in the practical absence of
the family among the proletarians, and in public prostitution.
The bourgeois family will vanish as a matter of course when its complement vanishes,
and both will vanish with the vanishing of capital.
Do you charge us with wanting to stop the exploitation of children by their parents?
To this crime we plead guilty.
But, you say, we destroy the most hallowed of relations, when we replace home
education by social.
And your education! Is not that also social, and determined by the social conditions
under which you educate, by the intervention direct or indirect, of society, by means
of schools, etc? The Communists have not invented the intervention of society in
education; they do but seek to alter the character of that intervention, and to rescue
education from the influence of the ruling class.
The bourgeois clap-trap about the family and education, about the hallowed co-
relation of parents and child, becomes all the more disgusting, the more, by the ac-
tion of Modern Industry, all the family ties among the proletarians are torn asunder,
and their children transformed into simple articles of commerce and instruments
of labour.
But you Communists would introduce community of women, screams the bour-
geoisie in chorus.
The bourgeois sees his wife a mere instrument of production. He hears that the instru-
ments of production are to be exploited in common, and, naturally, can come to no
other conclusion that the lot of being common to all will likewise fall to the women.
He has not even a suspicion that the real point aimed at is to do away with the status
of women as mere instruments of production.
For the rest, nothing is more ridiculous than the virtuous indignation of our bour-
geois at the community of women which, they pretend, is to be openly and officially
established by the Communists. The Communists have no need to introduce com-
munity of women; it has existed almost from time immemorial.
Our bourgeois, not content with having wives and daughters of their proletarians
at their disposal, not to speak of common prostitutes, take the greatest pleasure in
seducing each other's wives.
Bourgeois marriage is, in reality, a system of wives in common and thus, at the most,
what the Communists might possibly be reproached with is that they desire to intro-
duce, in substitution for a hypocritically concealed, an openly legalised community
of women. For the rest, it is self-evident that the abolition of the present system of
production must bring with it the abolition of the community of women springing
from that system, i.e., of prostitution both public and private.
The Communists are further reproached with desiring to abolish countries and
nationality.
The working men have no country. We cannot take from them what they have not
got. Since the proletariat must first of all acquire political supremacy, must rise to
be the leading class of the nation, must constitute itself the nation, it is so far, itself
national, though not in the bourgeois sense of the word.
National differences and antagonism between peoples are daily more and more
vanishing, owing to the development of the bourgeoisie, to freedom of commerce,
to the world market, to uniformity in the mode of production and in the conditions
of life corresponding thereto.
The supremacy of the proletariat will cause them to vanish still faster. United ac-
tion, of the leading civilised countries at least, is one of the first conditions for the
emancipation of the proletariat.
In proportion as the exploitation of one individual by another will also be put an end
to, the exploitation of one nation by another will also be put an end to. In proportion
as the antagonism between classes within the nation vanishes, the hostility of one
nation to another will come to an end.
The charges against Communism made from a religious, a philosophical and, gen-
erally, from an ideological standpoint, are not deserving of serious examination.
Does it require deep intuition to comprehend that man's ideas, views, and concep-
tion, in one word, man's consciousness, changes with every change in the conditions
of his material existence, in his social relations and in his social life?
What else does the history of ideas prove, than that intellectual production changes
its character in proportion as material production is changed? The ruling ideas of
each age have ever been the ideas of its ruling class.
When people speak of the ideas that revolutionise society, they do but express that
fact that within the old society the elements of a new one have been created, and
that the dissolution of the old ideas keeps even pace with the dissolution of the old
conditions of existence.
When the ancient world was in its last throes, the ancient religions were overcome
by Christianity. When Christian ideas succumbed in the 18th century to rationalist
ideas, feudal society fought its death battle with the then revolutionary bourgeoisie.
The ideas of religious liberty and freedom of conscience merely gave expression to
the sway of free competition within the domain of knowledge.
"Undoubtedly'" it will be said, "religious, moral, philosophical, and juridical ideas
have been modified in the course of historical development. But religion, morality,
philosophy, political science, and law, constantly survived this change."
-19.


<!-- page-11 (book p.121) -->

"There are, besides, eternal truths, such as Freedom, Justice, etc., that are common
to all states of society. But Communism abolishes eternal truths, it abolishes all
religion, and all morality, instead of constituting them on a new basis; it therefore
acts in contradiction to all past historical experience."
What does this accusation reduce itself to? The history of all past society has con-
sisted in the development of class antagonisms, antagonisms that assumed different
forms at different epochs.
But whatever form they may have taken, one fact is common to all past ages, viz.,
the exploitation of one part of society by the other. No wonder, then, that the social
consciousness of past ages, despite all the multiplicity and variety it displays, moves
within certain common forms, or general ideas, which cannot completely vanish
except with the total disappearance of class antagonisms.
The Communist revolution is the most radical rupture with traditional property
relations; no wonder that its development involved the most radical rupture with
traditional ideas.
But let us have done with the bourgeois objections to Communism.
We have seen above, that the first step in the revolution by the working class is to
raise the proletariat to the position of ruling class to win the battle of democracy.
The proletariat will use its political supremacy to wrest, by degree, all capital from
the bourgeoisie, to centralise all instruments of production in the hands of the State,
i.e., of the proletariat organised as the ruling class; and to increase the total produc-
tive forces as rapidly as possible.
Of course, in the beginning, this cannot be effected except by means of despotic
inroads on the rights of property, and on the conditions of bourgeois production;
by means of measures, therefore, which appear economically insufficient and un-
tenable, but which, in the course of the movement, outstrip themselves, necessitate
further inroads upon the old social order, and are unavoidable as a means of entirely
revolutionising the mode of production.
These measures will, of course, be different in different countries.
Nevertheless, in most advanced countries, the following will be pretty generally
applicable.
1. Abolition of property in land and application of all rents of land to public
purposes.
2. A heavy progressive or graduated income tax.
3. Abolition of all rights of inheritance.
4. Confiscation of the property of all emigrants and rebels.
5. Centralisation of credit in the hands of the state, by means of a national bank
with State capital and an exclusive monopoly.
6. Centralisation of the means of communication and transport in the hands
of the State.
7. Extension of factories and instruments of production owned by the State;
the bringing into cultivation of waste-lands, and the improvement of the soil
generally in accordance with a common plan.
8. Equal liability of all to work. Establishment of industrial armies, especially
for agriculture.
9. Combination of agriculture with manufacturing industries; gradual abolition
of all the distinction between town and country by a more equable distribu-
tion of the populace over the country.
10. Free education for all children in public schools. Abolition of children's fac-
tory labour in its present form. Combination of education with industrial
production, etc, etc.
When, in the course of development, class distinctions have disappeared, and all pro-
duction has been concentrated in the hands of a vast association of the whole nation,
the public power will lose its political character. Political power, properly so called,
is merely the organised power of one class for oppressing another. If the proletariat
during its contest with the bourgeoisie is compelled, by the force of circumstances,
to organise itself as a class, if, by means of a revolution, it makes itself the ruling
class, and, as such, sweeps away by force the old conditions of production, then it
will, along with these conditions, have swept away the conditions for the existence
of class antagonisms and of classes generally, and will thereby have abolished its
own supremacy as a class.
In place of the old bourgeois society, with its classes and class antagonisms, we shall
have an association, in which the free development of each is the condition for the
free development of all.
The Communist Manifesto by Karl Marx and Frederic Engels. Published in 1848, this work meets the criteria for fair use.


<!-- page-12 (book p.123) -->

"THE COMMUNIST MANIFESTO" DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. Why does The Communist Manifesto insist on the abolition of private property?
The Communist Manifesto says, "The theory of the Communists may be summed up in
the single sentence: Abolition of private property. Instead of seeing private property as
the groundwork of all personal freedom and independence, Communism sees it as a
tool of capitalist oppression:
You are horrified at our intending to do away with private property. But in your
existing society, private property is already done away with for nine-tenths of the
population; its existence for the few is solely due to its non-existence in the hands
of those nine-tenths.
Private property must be turned into common property so it can't be used against the
bourgeois.
[As a follow up question, ask your students what the Bible say about private property?]
2. Why does The Communist Manifesto insist on the abolition of the family?
Since the family is based on the capitalist notion of personal gain, it must be abolished
along with private property:
The bourgeois family will vanish as a matter of course when its complement vanishes,
and both will vanish with the vanishing of capital.
Children must be taken from their parents, who are exploiting them, and educated by
the state to undo the evil influence of the ruling class:
Do you charge us with wanting to stop the exploitation of children by their parents?
To this crime we plead guilty. The Communists have not invented the intervention
of society in education; they do but seek to alter the character of that intervention,
and to rescue education from the influence of the ruling class.
[As a follow up question, ask your students shat the Bible say about the family?]
3. Why does The Communist Manifesto insist on the abolition of marriage?
Communism assumes that women are exploited by traditional marriage:
Our bourgeois, not content with having wives and daughters of their proletarians
at their disposal, not to speak of common prostitutes, take the greatest pleasure in
seducing each other's wives. Bourgeois marriage is, in reality, a system of wives in
common and thus, at the most, what the Communists might possibly be reproached
with is that they desire to introduce, in substitution for a hypocritically concealed, an
openly legalized community of women.
"THE COMMUNIST MANIFESTO" DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
Women must be freed from their bondage to men by the abolishment of traditional
marriage and capitalistic society.
[As a follow up question, ask your students what the Bible says about the role of women
in marriage and society?]
4. Why does The Communist Manifesto insist on the abolition of nations?
Nations are organized by the ruling class to oppress the working class:
The working men have no country. We cannot take from them what they
have not got. Since the proletariat must first of all acquire political supremacy,
must rise to be the leading class of the nation, must constitute itself the na-
tion, it is so far, itself national, though not in the bourgeois sense of the word.
Nations have to be done away with as "one of the first conditions for the emancipa-
tion of the proletariat."
[As a follow up question, ask your students what the Bible say about the existence of nations?
Why does The Communist Manifesto insist on the abolition of religion?
Religions are supposedly based on "eternal truths, such as freedom, justice, etc., that are
common to all states of society":
But Communism abolishes eternal truths, it abolishes all religion, and all morality,
instead of constituting them on a new basis; it therefore acts in contradiction to all
past historical experience.
Why this break with the past? Because throughout history, religion has been used as a
tool of oppression by the ruling class:
The history of all past society has consisted in the development of class antagonisms,
antagonisms that assumed different forms at different epochs. But whatever form
they may have taken, one fact is common to all past ages, viz., the exploitation of
one part of society by the other.
[As a follow up question, ask your students what the Bible say about the role of religion in
society?]


<!-- page-13 (book p.125) -->

"THE MARXIST WORLDVIEW" VIDEO
Jeff Myers defines the Marxist worldview as "secularism weaponized." The goal of Marxists
is to bring about through revolution the overthrow of the structures of society. Today,
more than half the world has to deal with Marxist doctrines or policies. Jeff explains
how Marxism is the body of ideas traveling on the road of socialism to the destination
of communism.
Dr. Myers outlines the two key concepts on which Marxism is based: dialectical material-
ism and economic determinism. He points out the four key institutions of society Marxists
need to overthrow: economy, government, religion, and family. He closes with the three
keys to a biblical view of economics: private property and individual responsibility, rule
of law, and the image of God, which lead to innovation and the use of information.
To access this video, go to www.summitu.com/utt and enter the passcode found in the back
of your manual.
"THE MARXIST WORLDVIEW" VIDEO OUTLINE
Marxism is Secularism —
weaponized The goal of Marxism is to bring
about through revolution the overthrow of the structures of society. Today one of five
people on the planet live in communist countries. There are many other countries
where Marxists are part of the government. More than half the world has to deal with
Marxist doctrines or policies.
*THE MARXIST WORLDVIEW" VIDEO OUTLINE
Marxism is the body of ideas traveling on the road of _
tion of _
communism
socialism
to the destina-
Two key concepts on which Marxism is based:
1. Dialectical materialism
_: Thesis-antitheses—synthesis. Marx took this
philosophical process and applied it to history. He saw communism as the ultimate
synthesis of historical struggle.
2. Economic determinism
_: Struggle between the bourgeoisie and the
proletariat. Bourgeoisie are the rich who control the means of production, capital,
resources, and labor. Proletariat are the workers, who are purified from evil intent
through their poverty. When put in charge they will do what is right.
Four key institutions of society Marxists intend to overthrow:
Economy
Government
Religion
Family
Wealth in America: In the United States, the rich are getting richer, but the poor are also
getting richer, just not as fast as the rich are getting richer. Percentage-wise, the poorer
classes have grown more rich than the wealthy. The most valuable things today are based on
information. Wealth increases through innovation and invention.
The greatest challenge for the next generation is the national debt. Average debt per person:
• 1917 — $617
• 1975 - $8,767
• 2011 - $47,093


<!-- page-14 (book p.127) -->

"THE MARXIST WORLDVIEW" DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. What are the three main aspects of the Marxist worldview?
Marxism is the worldview conceived by Karl Marx and put forward in The Communist
Manifesto. Socialism is the road on which the vehicle travels. Socialism means the ab-
sence of private property (especially property used to produce things). Communism is
the destination that Marxists believe is the inevitable outcome of the historical struggle.
"Marxism is the body of ideas traveling on the road of socialism to the destination
of communism." (Jeff Myers)
2. What are the two key concepts on which Marxism is based?
Dialectical materialism: George Hegel spoke of the dialectical method: thesis (a premise),
antitheses (its opposite), and synthesis (the idea that emerges from the battle between
thesis and antitheses). This whole process repeats itself toward an ultimate goal.
Marx took this philosophical process and applied it to history. He saw communism as
the ultimate synthesis of the historical struggle. He believed it was inevitable.
Economic determinism: This relates to the struggle between the bourgeoisie and the
proletariat. The bourgeoisie are the rich who control the means of production, capital,
resources, and labor. They use these for themselves, rather than for the common good,
and live off the spoils.
The proletariat are the workers. They are purified from evil intent through their poverty
and struggle. When put in charge they will do what is right. They can't be wrong as there
is no higher law. This is proletariat morality.
3. What are the four key institutions of society that Marxists intend to overthrow?
Economics: The problem is that poor people (the proletariat) are poor because rich
people (the bourgeoisie) are rich. This is based on a zero-sum view of the world. That's
why the poor have to take back from the rich, hence the need for revolution.
Government: The rich control the government and use the law and force to protect
themselves. The government is corrupt and not on the side of the common man.
Religion: Priests are complicit in protecting the rich. The church keeps the poor from
rising up by promising them things will be better in the next life and they should accept
their lot in this one. Religion keeps people from revolting.
Family: Parents train their children to keep the economic system the way it is. Children
need to be taken from families and raised in common, just as everything else is held in
common. The government should educate children, not families.
- LO -
"THE MARXIST WORLDVIEW" DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
4. Are Bernie Sanders and other Democratic Socialists right about fixing America's
economy by redistributing wealth from the rich to the poor?
In the United States, the rich are getting richer, but the poor are also getting richer. The
gap continues to get bigger; still, both sides are growing richer. But percentage-wise, the
poorer classes have grown more rich than the wealthy.
According to Michael Shermer, "The poor are getting a smaller percentage of the pie, but
it is a much bigger pie." The key isn't to take from the wealthy, as socialism proposes, since
this will just drive them elsewhere. Besides, if all the wealth were taken from America's
billionaires, it would run the government for less than six months.
The key is to trade the small pizza for the extra-large pizza. We have to create a bigger pie
by creating new wealth. The way to do this is to capitalize on innovation and information,
not natural resources. Wealth increases through innovation and invention.
What is the greatest challenge facing the next generation in America?
The greatest challenge looming on the horizon is the national debt. Here is what the
average share of debt has been per person:
• 1917 - $617
• 1975 - $8767
• 2011 - $47,093
Today, a young couple with two children could wind up with their family portion of the
national debt being around $500,000.
What most people don't realize is that the U.S. government went into debt on purpose
based on work of economist John Maynard Keynes. He taught that the government
should borrow money to help parts of the economy that were struggling. When these
areas improved it would more than pay off the debt. This worked for a while in the 1940s,
but now it has flipped around so that the government goes further into debt every year.
[Ask your students these follow-up questions. Do some research on possible answers before-
hand or consider inviting an economist or financial expert as a guest speaker.
• To whom does America owe all this money?
• What would happen to America if we can't pay our loans when they become due?
• Why can't America just declare bankruptcy like an individual or corporation and
get out of trouble that way?]


<!-- page-15 (book p.128) -->

Chapter 5 Key Points
Key Questions:
1. What are the tenets of
the Marxist worldview?
Key Terms:
1. Bourgeoisie
2. Capitalism
3. Class Consciousness
4. Communism
5. Dialectical Materialism
6. Economic Determinism
7. Marxism*
8. Progressivism
9. Proletariat
10. Proletariat Morality
11. State capitalism
12. Socialism
CHAPTER 5 ASSIGNMENT
Key Players:
1 Fidel Castro
2. Friedrich Engels
3. Che Guevara
4. Michael Hardt
5. V.I. Lenin
6. Mao Tse-Tung (Mao Zedong)
7. Karl Marx
8. Antonio Negri
9. Joseph Stalin
10. Leon Trotsky
Key Works:
1. Commonwealth by Michael Hardt and Antonio
Negri
2. The Communist Manifesto by Karl Marx and
Friedrich Engels
3. Das Kapital by Karl Marx
4. Empire by Michael Hardt and Antonio Negri
5. The Motorcycle Dairies by Che Guevara
6. Multitude by Michael Hardt and Antonio Negri
*Short answer or essay question on the exan
Hey friend!
My life has been pretty crazy over the last few weeks! Midterms are intense around here, even
though I'm only a freshman. For some reason, the teachers think it's okay if they assign a bunch of
homework on top of all the studying we have to do for their midterms! I think one of my most difficult
classes is gonna be economics. We have to know quite a few of the major economists in addition to
what their contributions were. I have trouble keeping their names and dates straight. We also have to
know a bunch of equations and graphs. It will be rough.
My last Econ class was really interesting though. We talked about the effects of price ceilings and
floors on supply and demand. Apparently, if the government places a ceiling, or a maximum legal price
for a good, in a market where the actual value of that product is more than the ceiling, it creates all kinds
of problems. The demand will exceed the supply, and a shortage will occur. Sometimes black markets
even result. Then with price floors, such as minimum wage, lots of people lose their jobs because
companies can't afford to hire as many people since their skills are not worth the price set by the floor. If
that whole discussion confuses you, you're not alone. I think I have a grasp on the general idea, but the
specifics can get kind of confusing for me.
We did have an interesting discussion about all that in class though, which is why I told you
about it. There's a guy in my class named Mark, and he disagreed with most of what the professor has
said so far. During this last discussion, he kept piping up and saying things like, "If we just made it to
where everyone earned the same amount of money, we wouldn't have problems with price floors
and minimum wage." And"I don't see the problem with ceilings. If the government mandated that all
producers had to set their prices the same, we'd get rid of all these supply and demand complications,
and capitalists wouldn't take everyone's money because of unfair pricing!"
He keeps talking about this guy named Lenin. I totally embarrassed myself by saying, "Wait, I didn't
know John Lennon was an economist!" Everyone laughed at me. Apparently it's a different Lenin...
shows how much I know. He also quotes someone named "Marx" who apparently formulated a whole
worldview called "Marxism." I'm assuming you've heard of this guy. What does Marxism teach? I'm
guessing there is more to it than just economics. What does Marxism say about humanity? And
what does Marxism say is wrong with us? Finally, what does Marxism say about how we
should live?
Thanks so much for helping me with my questions... again! I feel like I can speak more intelligently
with my friends after I get your letters back. I look forward to your answers on this one!
Gotta go! Bye!
-Doug
