# Chapter 10

<!-- page-1 (book p.10) -->

UNIT
CHAPTER 10 LEARNING OBJECTIVeS
Students will be able to:
1. define what ethics is and why it is important. [10.1]
identify the difference between ethics and morality and the two overarching
ethical theories. 10.2]
3. explain Secularism's approach to ethics. [10.3]
4. explain Marxism's approach to ethics. [10.4]
5. explain Postmodernism's approach to ethics. [10.5]
6. explain New Spirituality's approach to ethics. [10.6]
7. explain Islam's approach to ethics. [10.7]
8. explain Christianity's approach to ethics and Christianity's response to ethical
relativism. [10.8]


<!-- page-2 (book p.241) -->

CHAPTER 10
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. What is ethics? What are the two big questions it seeks to answer? [10.1]
Ethics is the study of right and wrong. Ethics seeks to answer two foundational questions:
"What does it mean to live a good life?" and "How should we live?" But ethics is more
than a guide for life. It proposes a way to think through and address life's most difficult
questions about belief and behavior.
At the core of every moral code there is a picture of human nature, a map of the
universe, and a version of history. To human nature (of the sort conceived), in a
universe (of the kind imagined), after a history (so understood), the rules of the
code apply. (Walter Lippmann)
Chapter 10.1 Activity
JEAN VALJEAN AND THE STUDY OF RIGHT AND WRONG
Objective: Students will select current news stories to show a good example and a poor
example of someone's choices.
• Materials Needed: newspapers, computer or paper and pencil
• Time Required: 15 minutes
1. Discuss with students how ethics investigates what it means to live a good life and would it
be good for all of us if everyone lived that way.
2. Have students use newspapers or online sources of current news stories to find an example
of someone acting in a manner that would be a good way for everyone to live. Then they
also research to find an example of someone acting in a manner that would not be a good
way for everyone to live.
3. Select students to read their examples. Discuss whether teens in another country would
agree with the examples chosen and why or why not.
2. What is the underlying basis for Christian ethics? [10.1]
Christianity sees God's character as the basis for human ethics. His character is revealed
through nature and Scripture. And since God is everywhere, an ethical system based on
his character will resonate in every soul, across all cultures, at all times.
There is a basic pattern of similarity among ethical codes]. Such things as murder,
lying, adultery, cowardice are, for example, almost always condemned. The universal-
ity of the ethical sense itself (the "oughtness" of conduct), and the similarities within
the codes of diverse cultures indicate a common moral heritage for all mankind
which materialism or naturalism cannot explain. (Calvin D. Linton)
Christians see common ethical systems among different cultures as evidence of a universal
law and thus a universal lawgiver.
3. Can you explain the difference between morality and ethics? [10.2]
Morality refers to a personal system of determining right and wrong based on some
standard-what we prefer, what we think is good. Ethics is the philosophical study of
morality that examines the moral conduct, values, duties, and goodness of people. Picture
morality as a container of right and wrong. Ethics is the study of how this container is
discovered and how people apply it to their lives.
Obviously, morality and ethics are intertwined. We have our personal morality-how
do we want to live? But societies have to set up a shared ethic—how do people with dif-
ferent moral codes get along?
4. Into what main categories can theories of ethics be divided? [10.2]
There are two main types of ethical theories:
Teleological (telos is Greek for "end" or "purpose") theories judge actions as right or
wrong by their ends, or purposes. Teleological ethics asks questions like, "What is the
good life?" "What is the purpose or end of a good life?" and "How might the good life
be secured for as many people as possible?"
Deontological (deon is Greek for "duty") theories say we ought to do what is right merely
because it's right. Deontological ethics holds that right and wrong actually exist indepen-
dent of our situation or circumstance. It asks the question, "How might we understand
right and wrong and do what's right?"
An ethical system that judges morality by the consequences of the actions is teleological.
An ethical system that judges morality based upon some principal of duty is deontological.
5. To which ethical categories do the major systems of philosophy belong? [10.2]
Systems of philosophy that are teleological include:
• Hedonism: Human beings should maximize their own personal pleasure.
• Utilitarianism: It is ethical to pursue the greatest good for the greatest number
of people.
• Ethical egoism: The good life is being free to look after ones own interests.
• Moral skepticism: Objective moral knowledge is either inaccessible or impossible.


<!-- page-3 (book p.243) -->

Systems of philosophy that are deontological include:
• Transcendental idealism: Our duty as humans is to figure out what is good without
qualification and then pursue it.
• Rationalism: We are thinking beings, so we must use our reasoning ability to live
virtuously.
6. What are some problems with teleological ethical theories? [10.2]
First, teleological theories have a hard time explaining why so many of us act against
our self-interest. Second, although teleological theories require us to act according to
outcomes, it's often difficult, if not impossible, to predict consequences. Finally, teleo-
logical systems can be used to justify doing evil in order to bring about good outcomes.
Chapter 10.2 Activity
A PRIMER ON ETHICS
Objective: Students will write an essay explaining their view of morality now and how it might
be different if they lived abroad for a semester.
• Materials Needed: computer or paper and pencil
• Time Required: 30-45 minutes
1. Discuss with students their definition of morality and if/how their morality might change
in the future when they go away to college. Mention that living with their parents influ-
ences their choices, but they are not always going to be with their parents. Allow time for
students to share about older siblings who have moved out and whether they maintain the
same morals they had when they lived at home.
2. Tell students that they have been selected to participate in an exchange program for a
semester in another country. Have students write an essay explaining what their view of
morality is now and how it might become different if they lived abroad for a semester in a
country with a family that had a very loose or different view of morality. Encourage students
to consider how they would behave if they knew that their host family would not betray
them or report their behavior to their parents.
3. Invite volunteers to share their essays with the class.
7. What is the main problem with deontological ethical theories? [10.2]
The main problem with deontological theories is that they don't allow for exceptions.
According to such theories, conflicts between moral imperatives don't exist. However,
conflicts do sometimes occur. In those situations, it makes sense to consider the conse-
quences of our actions over a duty to follow principles.
8. Is it ever right to do wrong? [10.2]
Christians believe in absolute right and wrong based on the character of God. But what
do we do when ethical absolutes come into conflict? Can you think of some situations
where it might be acceptable to do something that would, as a general rule, be wrong?
Lying to protect Jews from the Nazis, or Christians from ISIS. Biblical examples of
doing exactly this, cited approvingly by the biblical authors, are found in Exodus when
the Hebrew midwives refused to kill male babies as instructed, and in Joshua where
Rahab hid the Hebrew spies and lied to the authorities.
Disobeying the law when it conflicts with the higher law of God. Christians are to
obey the government (Rom. 13), but not when it commands behavior contrary to God's
laws, e.g. Martin Luther King Jr. and others who defied segregation laws; believers who
preach the gospel in closed countries where it's illegal to do so.
The key is that, in these situations, a higher law than human law exists and is knowable
by people who think clearly and are not otherwise swayed by prior commitments.
9. What is the ethics of Secularism based on? [10.3]
The ethics of Secularism is based on atheism, naturalism, and humanism. There is no
divine rule-giver; humans make their own rules.
We have not found authoritative ethical prescriptions built into the order of things.
No god wrote the laws of good behavior into the cosmos. Nature has no concern
for good or bad, right or wrong. (Simon Blackburn)
Secularist ethics are determined by life circumstances or cultural practices, which lead
to either moral relativism or utilitarianism. Moral relativism is the belief that morality
is relative to, or defined by, the individual or culture. Utilitarianism is the belief that we
should do what results in the greatest good for the greatest number of people.
10. If there's no God or fixed moral code, where does morality come from according to
Secularists? [10.3]
Many Secularists believe human morality and ethical impulses have been developed as
part of the evolutionary process. They are convinced that Darwin dealt a deathblow to
Judeo-Christian and Kantian ethics, and any other fixed moral code. This view is bol-
stered by the work of sociobiologists like E. O. Wilson, who try to explain everything
people do based on evolution.


<!-- page-4 (book p.245) -->

To the Secularist, theistic or supernatural explanations for human morality aren't just
wrong, they're restrictive and dangerous.
The traditional supernaturalistic moral commandments are especially repressive of
our human needs. They are immoral insofar as they foster illusions about human
destiny [the afterlife] and suppress vital inclinations. (Paul Kurtz)
11. Who are some of the philosophers who led the shift away from a God-based morality
to a humanistic moral relativism? [10.3]
Rene Descartes: By saying,
"I think, therefore I am" Descartes opened the door to the
idea that we are each capable of arriving at the truth on our own.
John Locke: To "know things" means to understand the relationships between them
rather than to discern absolute qualities.
Immanuel Kant: There is no way of knowing, outside of the mind, what the phenomena
we observe are actually like.
John Stuart Mill: We are free to act as we please as long as we do not bring harm to others.
William James: There is no universal knowledge of truth; what is good must be judged
by its consequences.
John Dewey: Even if there were absolute truths we could not know them; we should
focus on improving the world in the here and now.
12. What is situation ethics and where does it lead? [10.3]
Situation ethics is the belief that the morality of an action is determined by the unique
situation of that action. Right and wrong are based on "the situations in which moral
agents have to decide for the most beneficial course open to choice" (Joseph Fletcher).
Ultimately, situation ethics is a license for doing whatever each person thinks is best
in any given situation. Moral behavior differs from person to person and situation to
situation.
The morality or immorality of any behavior, including sexual behavior, has been put
in the context of "situation ethics." In this approach moral behavior may differ from
situation to situation. Behavior might be moral for one person and not another or
moral at one time and not another. (Arthur E. Gravatt)
- L44-
13. What is scientism and where does it lead? [10.3]
Scientism is the belief that reliable knowledge is obtained solely through the scientific
method. Science is the primary guide for forming a workable moral code and ethical
outlook.
It should be absolutely clear to any thoughtful and informed person that morality,
far from being divorced from intelligence, depends more thoroughly and completely
upon intelligence and scientific information than any other phase of human thought.
(Harry Elmer Barnes)
Scientism can lead to the unwarranted belief that scientific people are more intelligent
and thus more moral, therefore we can trust them to do what is right. But history shows
just how disastrous this assumption can be. Who was smarter, Nietzsche or Mother
Teresa? Who would you vote for as mayor of your city?
14. How are Secularists being inconsistent when they accept the Golden Rule as good
for humanity? [10.3]
Secularists adhere to some standard of behavior-the Golden Rule, the Ten Command-
ments-even if they don't like where it comes from—the Bible.
Any humane philosophy must include such New Testament ideals as the brotherhood
of man, peace on earth and the abundant life. There is much ethical wisdom, too,
in the Old Testament and its Ten Commandments. Without accepting any ethical
principal as a dogmatic dictum never to be questioned, the Humanist certainly
adheres in general to a Biblical commandment such as, "Thou shalt not bear false
witness against thy neighbor." (Corliss Lamont)
Can you think of other instances where Secularists insist on a code of conduct while
rejecting its original source?
• Women and children first in life-threatening situations
• Care for the poor, the disabled, refuges, widows, and orphans
• Civil rights and anti-segregation laws
• Geneva convention for the treatment of prisoners
• Humane treatment of animals
• Property rights
15. What is at the core of Marxist ethics? (10.4
Proletariat morality is at the heart of Marxist ethics. It says that society is constantly
moving upward toward the elimination of all social and economic classes. The next
social advance will be the move from capitalism to communism. Whatever helps the
proletariat and communism is morally good and whatever hinders them, like religion
and capitalism, are morally evil.


<!-- page-5 (book p.247) -->

From the point of view of communist morality the struggle against everything
which hinders the cause of communist construction is moral and humane and for
this reason we consider the struggle against the enemies of communism to be of a
moral nature. (G. L. Andreyev)
In Marxist ethics, the ends justify the means. Anything that advances the goal of a classless
society is ethical, including violent revolution. Revolution is painful and bloody because
evolution is painful and bloody. In the struggle toward communism, the fit must survive
and the unfit must perish.
Chapter 10.4 Activity
MARXISM
Objective: Students will write a paper imagining they invented something that will help hu-
manity and write an imaginary dialogue that challenges Marxism's ethical stance
that capitalism is immoral.
• Materials Needed: computer or paper and pencil
• Time Required: 15-30 minutes
1. Discuss with students the fact that Marxism believes everything about capitalism is
immoral.
2. Guide students to imagine a scenario in which each of them is an entrepreneur who cre-
ated a product that could greatly impact society or the world for good, such as reduce pol-
lution or cure cancer.
3. Have them write a paper detailing their product or invention, how it could help human-
ity, and how it would be marketed to the public. Of course, a popular product such as this
would reap millions of dollars for the producer or inventor. Direct students to think about
what a Marxist would say and include a dialogue between two of them. The dialogue
should focus on the Marxist dilemma between hating capitalism but supporting an oppor-
tunity to help humanity.
4. Invite volunteers to read their papers. Discuss the realistic qualities of the dialogues and
portrayal of the conflict of ethics for Marxists.
16. Why is hatred a good thing in Marxism when other ethical codes see it as evil? [10.4]
Hatred is right and good in the Marxist ethical code when it is directed toward the
bourgeoisie. Hatred is needed to fuel the clash between the proletariat and the bourgeoi-
sie. Marxist leaders rely on hatred to keep their followers in a perpetual revolutionary
mindset. While Marxists may hope for a more harmonious future, what keeps them
energized in the present is hatred.
The idea of bloody revolution must be kept alive to fuel the fires of hatred. This is one
reason why Marxist leaders such as Mao Tse Tung, Josef Stalin, Fidel Castro, and Kim Jong
Un dressed in military garb and peppered their speeches with revolutionary language.
17. What does "the good life" consist of according to New Spirituality? [10.5]
The good life consists in attaining higher consciousness. When each individual does
this, life will be better for all. To reach this lofty goal, every person must have complete
freedom to act in harmony with his or her own understanding of truth.
According to New Spirituality, the source for morality is found within each of us, not
outside us in some divine code or societal ethic. We must rid ourselves of past ideas and
arbitrary rules and set our own standards.
We should search ourselves very carefully to see if we have any fixed ideas, any
great shyness or self-consciousness. If we have, we must seek freedom. (Vera Alder)
Create your own reality according to what feels right for you. (Randall Baer)
Morality is nebulous in New Spiritualism. Establishing a system of ethics that works
for everyone is impossible. We can know what is right for ourselves, but we can't know
whether others are doing what is right for them.
18. Not all New Spiritualists are absolute individualists. How do Buddhists and Hindus
differ in their approach to ethics? [10.5]
Buddhists and Hindus recognize that some actions are objectively right or wrong. Wrong
actions cause suffering, diminish happiness, and have a negative impact on future lives.
By refraining from the ten nonvirtuous actions of killing, stealing, sexual misconduct,
lying, divisive speech, harsh speech, idle gossip, covetousness, malice, and wrong
view, we are restrained from causing others harm and from bringing about our
own future suffering. This prepares us for a fortunate future life. (The Dalai Lama)
The sacred book of Hinduism, the Bhagavad Gita, identifies certain traits as objectively
wrong: "Hypocrisy, insolence, anger, cruelty, ignorance, conceit—these, Arjuna, are the
qualities of men with demonic traits." These are wrong because they violate universal
oneness and separate us from one another.


<!-- page-6 (book p.249) -->

19. If everyone does what he or she wants, is there any accountability in New Spiritualty?
[10.5]
Because morality is different for each person, whatever we decide to do is right—for us.
The only accountability we have is to our future selves. The concept of karma says the
consequences of what we do will eventually be visited upon us, for good or ill.
Whatever action one takes will ultimately return to that person-good and bad-
maybe not in this life embodiment, but sometime in the future. And no one is
exempt... For every act, for every indifference, for every misuse of life, we are
finally held accountable. And it is up to us to understand what those accounts might
be. (Shirley MacLaine)
But here's the karmic dilemma for New Spiritualists: if karma is a knowable law, then
absolute ethical standards exist and we are obligated to explain their source and obey
them. But if karmic outcomes are unknowable, karma can't guide us because we can't
really know whether our actions are right or wrong.
20. What is unique about the Postmodernist approach to ethics? [10.6]
Postmodern ethics looks with suspicion on both divine revelation and human reason
as sources of truth. They don't accept the special revelation that's the basis of Christian
ethics, nor the scientific method and reasoning of Secularists or Marxists. For them,
there are no absolutes, no universal truths.
I suggest that the novelty of the postmodern approach to ethics consists first and
foremost in ... the rejection of the typically modern ways of going about its moral
problems (that is ... the philosophical search for absolutes, universals and founda-
tions in theory). (Zygmunt Bauman)
To Postmodernists, the basis for ethics is "right action." But what constitutes right action?
If philosophical truth (what we can know about reality) resides in the local community,
it follows that moral truth resides in the community. This is known as cultural relativ-
ism, the belief that truth and morals are relative to one's culture.
21. What role does pragmatism play in Postmodernist ethics? [10.6]
*Pragmatism says that since truth is whatever works, morality is whatever is useful for
society. Postmodern pragmatists such as Richard Rorty view words as tools for getting
others to behave in a manner they deem preferable. But not all Postmodernists agree
with telling people what to do. Many reject Rorty's form of pragmatism as "a form of
pontification and imperial self-aggrandizement. ... No adult can know what's best for
another adult; and, by the same token, no group or society can know what's best for
another group or society" (Adam Phillips).
Phillips's stance is more typical of the postmodern mindset, which doesn't allow anyone
to be "right" on any particular issue, including ethics.
22. What is the source of morality and ethics in Islam? [10.7]
Muslims derive their morality and ethics from the Quran and the Hadith. The Quran
contains many ethical commands. The Hadith presents Muhammad as the exemplary
human who must be imitated in all respects.
Muhammad was only a mortal being commissioned by God to teach the word of
God and lead an exemplary life. He stands in history as the best model for man in
piety and perfection. He is a living proof of what man can be and of what he can
accomplish in the realm of excellence and virtue. (Hammudah Abdalati)
According to Islam, Allah is not directly knowable, but his decrees are fully revealed
through the words and deeds of Muhammad. This makes Muhammad vitally important
since he is the only means of knowing what can be known about Allah.
There is no division of ethics and law in Islam. Both are based on specific commands
from Allah, which is why this approach is referred to as the divine command theory. f
Divine command theory is the belief that right and wrong are determined by God's
commands.
23. What are the basic beliefs and behaviors required by Islamic ethics? [10.7]
The concept of morality in Islam centers around certain basic beliefs and principles.
Among these are the following: (1) God is the Creator and Source of all goodness,
truth, and beauty. (2) Man is a responsible, dignified, and honorable agent of his
Creator. (3) God has put everything in the heavens and the earth in the service of
mankind. (4) By His Mercy and Wisdom, God does not expect the impossible from
man or hold him accountable for anything beyond his power. Nor does God forbid
man to enjoy the good things of life. (5) Moderation, practicality, and balance are
the guarantees of high integrity and sound morality. (6) All things are permissible in
principle except what is singled out as obligatory, which must be observed, and what
is singled out as forbidden, which must be avoided. (7) Man's ultimate responsibility
is to God and his highest goal is the pleasure of his Creator. (Hammudah Abdalati)
Required actions include the five pillars of Islam discussed in the Islam chapter. Ethical
prohibitions include drinking wine, eating pork and some other animals, eating meat
that has not been properly slaughtered, and gambling.
24. What is the source of morality and ethics in Christianity? [10.8]
Christianity sees moral norms as proceeding from God's character. These norms are true,
even if they aren't popular. The task of Christian ethics is to determine what conforms to
God's character. Seeing right and wrong as objectively absolute based on the character
of a personal, loving God is superior to moral relativism.


<!-- page-7 (book p.251) -->

The basis of Christian ethics is found in what Jesus called the Great Commandment: to
love God with all our heart, soul, mind, and strength and to love our neighbor as ourselves
(Matt. 22:36-40; Luke 10:27). It can be summed up in the Greek word for unconditional
love, agape. The application of this ethic is simple and straightforward:
So whatever you wish that others would do to you, do also to them, for this is the
Law and the Prophets. (Matt. 7:12)
Let love be genuine. Abhor what is evil; hold fast to what is good. (Rom. 12:9)
Chapter 10.8 Activity
CHRISTIANITY
Objective: Students will apply Luke 10:27 to common ethical dilemmas faced by teens today.
• Materials Needed: Bible, computer or paper and pencil
Time Required: 15-30 minutes
Direct students to make a list of 5 moral dilemmas teens face today.
2. Have students turn to Luke 10:27 and write out the verse.
3. Then direct them to write an explanation of how Jesus' instructions for ethical behavior can
be applied to each dilemma.
4. Select students to share their explanations with the class. Choose a volunteer to tally the
dilemmas and report to the class the most common dilemmas. Ask students whether they
think teens who choose to follow Jesus' instructions will navigate smoother through these
dilemmas.
5. Invite students to spend time praying for teens who are facing dilemmas to choose to fol-
low Jesus and His instructions.
25. According to Christianity, where do moral absolutes come from? [10.8]
Moral absolutes are based on the character and nature of God and are seen in all their
glory in Jesus Christ, God incarnate. The Bible reveals the character and commands of
God, but it does not specify everything we are to do or not do. Rather, it gives clear guide-
lines for moral decisions so we can figure out what is right in the circumstances we face.
Rom 12:9
The apex of Christian ethical teaching is found in the Sermon on the Mount (Matt. 5-7).
The best way to discover and live out this ethic is by following in the footsteps of Jesus.
This requires being a servant and meeting the spiritual and physical needs of others.
It shall not be so among you. But whoever would be great among you must be your
servant, and whoever would be first among you must be your slave, even as the Son
of Man came not to be served but to serve, and to give his life as a ransom for many.
(Jesus Christ, Matt. 20:26-28)
Following Jesus is the simplest summation of Christian ethics and at the same time the
most difficult thing to do.
Chapter 10.9 Activity
THE CHRISTIAN RESPONSE TO RELATIVISTIC MORAL
SYSTEMS
Objective: Students will write a movie review about a movie that depicts a character choosing
to do what is right.
• Materials Needed: Bible, computer or paper and pencil
• Time Required: 15-30 minutes
1. Lead a discussion about Christianity's approach to ethics and Christianity's response to ethi-
cal relativism.
2. Have students think of a movie that depicts a character choosing to do what is right rather
than choosing to follow a response showing moral relativism. Direct them to write a movie
review that analyzes what the ethical dilemma was, what choices the character had, what
sacrifice was involved, and why the character responded the way he/she did.
3. Allow time for volunteers to share their movie reviews. Compare reviews on the same movies
and engage students in a discussion of whether they agreed with the character's actions or not.
26. See how many of the eight Beatitudes from the Sermon on the Mount (Matt 5-7) you
can recite from memory. Try ranking them in order of importance.
[Answers will vary.]


<!-- page-8 (book p.253) -->

"OBJECTIVE MORALITY" DEBATE
In a Cross Examination debate with Michael Shermer, Sean McDowell asks, "Can there
be goodness if God doesn't exist?" Shermer believes goodness exists whether God does
or not. He uses marriage to illustrate his claim, insisting we know infidelity is wrong,
even if there is no God. It's part of our social contract.
The two agree there are objective moral standards but disagree as to what they are based
upon. Shermer makes the case for their development as part of the evolutionary process.
McDowell maintains morality requires a standard outside of evolution: a mind that cre-
ated the universe and gives life a purpose.
In part two of the debate, Michael Shermer says moral behavior evolved naturally because
we are a social primate species; we learn there are consequences for our behavior; and
we have to work together and get along to survive, as individuals and as groups.
McDowell maintains that morality requires something beyond evolution and subjective
feelings. Even when Christians did not live up to the principles of Scripture in regard
to practices like slavery and discrimination, we know those behaviors are wrong, not
because they violate a social contract but because they violate the character of God.
To access this video, go to www.summitu.com/utt and
enter the passcode found in the back of your manual.
"OBJECTIVE MORALITY" DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. Can there be objective moral laws without God?
The issue isn't whether objective morality exists, but what it is based upon.
Michael Shermer believes we don't need God to have objective moral standards. They are
based on human relationships. Objective morality evolved over time as a result of social
contracts that helped individuals and groups survive. We learned there are consequences
for our behavior and that we have to work together and get along to survive. Morality is
shaped and reinforced by experience, not by divine revelation
Sean McDowell insists that objective moral laws require a moral lawgiver, that is, God.
These moral laws are like physical laws, such as gravity, that can't be changed by whether
we believe in them or not. For example, rape is wrong in and of itself, even if the rap-
ist doesn't believe it is wrong. We can't call rape objectively immoral unless there's an
objective standard, and there can't be an objective moral standard without an objective
moral lawgiver.
2. Do people have moral value in and of themselves?
Christians like Sean McDowell and atheists like Michael Shermer believe in the innate
value of all human beings; they just see it coming from different sources. Christians
believe human value is based on being made in the image of God. All people have value
regardless of gender, race, ability, or social standing.
Many atheists would say all humans have value based on the mutual respect and need
we have for each other. This starts with those closest to us, such as family, and extends
outward to our community and then to all humanity. Humanity can't survive without
moral values; this makes them objectively necessary.
For Christians, value comes from the top down—God to humans. Atheists like Shermer
believe value comes from the bottom up; we can't survive as a species without it, so we
grant it to ourselves.
3. Why do some people reject divine revelation as the source of belief in God and
objective truth?
Even if people allow for divine revelation and holy books, there are so many of them.
And they mostly contradict each other. So, how do we know which God is the true God?
And how do we resolve the inconsistencies within the books themselves? Finally, the
holy books have been interpreted differently at different times. How can something so
"subjective" be the basis for absolute truth?


<!-- page-9 (book p.255) -->

"ORTECTIVE MORALITY DISCUSSION DUESTIONS
One has to weigh the merits of each holy book, looking at things like internal consistency
and external veracity. Are the facts consistent with the real world? Does the message pass
the tests of truths? One also has to distinguish between what the books actually say and
what humans have said about them, separating content from interpretation.
The Bible does the best job of passing the tests of historical veracity, internal consistency,
and self-correcting of faulty human interpretation over time.
4. What is reciprocity and what role does it play in Shermer's understanding of morality?
Reciprocity is where a person does something nice for another person so that person
will do something nice for the first person. This is the basis for naturalistic morality. It
has to be real, not faked, because the group will eventually find out and treat the person
accordingly. Those who can be trusted will be accepted and affirmed; those who can't
be trusted will be shunned and eventually eliminated.
While morality can be created this way, Christians maintain there is a more solid expla-
nation. We have a sense of right and wrong, not because we made it up for utilitarian
reasons, but because we are made in the image of a moral being. Morality is based on
God's character, which is objective and unchanging, not human reciprocity, which is
subjective and volatile.
5. If God and the Bible are the source of morality, how do we explain the things God
commanded or allowed in the Old Testament that we consider immoral today?
The Bible includes laws and examples of things like slavery, murder, discrimination,
unequal treatment of women and aliens, and so on. Shermer says we see these behaviors
as immoral and condemn them today because we have progressed as a species for the
common good. This is evolutionary progress for the better from a theistic barbarism.
While some of God's people have done much that is wrong and immoral during biblical
times and since, many have also been in the forefront of reform movements that have
changed and are changing these behaviors in obedience to the principles of God's law,
the example of Christ and the leading of the Holy Spirit.
Cultures change and social norms vary but God's moral principles remain the same. As
civilizations conform to these moral principles they become healthier and more stable.
As they ignore them, they decline and eventually cease to exist.
"CAN WE BE MORAL WITHOUT GOD?" VIDEO
Can we be moral without God? Where does the moral law come from in the first place?
Can people who don't believe in it be good? Do we have the right to judge others? Frank
Beckwith takes on these questions and the issues of modern morality in this enlighten-
ing lecture. He describes the four characteristics of moral law and deals with the three
theories of where it comes from.
To access this video, go to www.summitu.com/utt and enter the passcode found in the back
of your manual.


<!-- page-10 -->

"CAN WE BE MORAL WITHOUT GOD?" VIDEO OUTLINE
awareness of moral law. Which worldview makes the most sense of this? Not materialism
or naturalism, because they don't believe there is anything outside the physical universe
that has an impact on reality. Christianity insists there is a moral law and it comes from
a moral lawgiver-God.
Moral _
relativists
doubt the existence of moral law, but they turn around
and appeal to it when their rights are violated. The New Atheists attack Christianity by
judging it against an objective moral law. But how can Christianity be evil if there's no
objective standard of good from which it deviates?
There are four characteristics of natural moral law:
1. Moral law is
nonphysical It consists of concepts (like ideas) that lack
physical substance.
2. Moral law is a form of.
communication
_ It has intellectual content.
3. Moral law has.
incumbency
-. This is a sense that we have a moral call
to do or not do something. It is sometimes called conscience.
4. Moral law, when violated, creates a deep sense of discomfort known as
guilt
If moral law exists, how did it come to be? Here are three possibilities:
1. It is an_
illusion Natural selection tricked us into believing in moral law.
These rules help us survive as we evolve, but they aren't objectively real.
2. It is based on.
chance
: If moral law is a product of chance, there's no
reason to obey it. If there's no mind behind it, then there's no intellectual content, so
why obey it?
3. It is the product of an_
intelligent
_ mind: What sort of intelligence does
it have to be? A mind that can be the ground for natural moral law. This mind would
have to be self-existent, perfectly good, and have authority to issue judgment. This
being couldn't be finite or contingent on anything else for existence. The only being
who meets these criteria is God.
"CAN WE BE MORAL WITHOUT GOD?" DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. What is the natural moral law?
The natural moral law is moral beliefs people hold that aren't directly derived from
special revelation or Scripture. The apostle Paul calls it "the law written in their hearts"
(Romans 2:15).
This moral law seems to be apparent in most civilizations across the globe and through-
out history.
What are some of the moral laws most people believe in?
• It's wrong to murder without just cause.
• It's wrong to commit adultery.
• It's wrong to betray a friend.
2. How are moral relativists and atheists inconsistent in their denial of moral law?
Moral relativists doubt the existence of moral law, but they turn around and appeal to
it when their rights are violated.
The New Atheists attack Christianity by judging it against an objective moral law. But
how can Christianity be evil if there's no objective standard of good from which it devi-
ates? Who says the Crusades, the Inquisition, and the witch trials were wrong? Those
people were just doing what they thought was right at the time.
3. What are the four characteristics of moral law?
• Moral law is nonphysical. It consists of concepts (like ideas) that lack physical
substance.
• Moral law is a form of communication. It has intellectual content.
• Moral law has incumbency. This is a sense that we have a moral call to do or not
do something. It is sometimes called conscience.
• Moral law, when violated, creates a deep sense of discomfort known as guilt.
4. If moral law exists, how did it come to be?
It is an illusion. Natural selection fooled us into believing in moral law, but it's a trick.
These rules help us survive as we evolve, but they aren't based on an objective standard.
It is based on chance. If moral law is a product of chance, there's no reason to obey it. If
there's no mind behind it, then there's no intellectual content, so why obey it?
It is the product of an intelligent mind. What sort of intelligence does it have to be?
A mind that can be the ground for natural moral law. This mind would have to be self-
existent, perfectly good, and have authority to issue judgment.


<!-- page-11 (book p.203) -->

"CAN WE BE MORAL WITHOUT GOD?" DISCUSSION OUESTIONS
How would you answer the argument that the moral law is a product of naturalistic
evolution?
There are three problems with this argument. The first is that it does not account for
motives and intent. Morality includes more than behavior. It's not just what we do but
why we do it that is encompassed in morality. It's not just about outcome but also intent,
which is recognized in our legal system and common experience.
Second, this explanation makes morality merely descriptive; it does not address the nature
of morality. Why should I emulate only those behaviors most of us would call "good"?
Evolution would give just as much weight to what we would call "evil" behaviors, so how
can it be a source of morality?
Finally, if our beliefs about the moral law only have survival value, then why aren't all
the other beliefs our minds hold subject to the same sort of analysis? Are our beliefs
about art, literature, science, philosophy, and so on only valid for their contribution
toward our survival? Or do they have a reality beyond our perception of them? If we
assume objective reality of these subjects, then why don't we assume the objective
reality of the moral law?
Chapter 10 Key Points
Key Questions:
1. What is ethics?
2. How do the six dominant Western
worldviews approach ethics?
Key Terms:
1. Agape*
2. Cultural Relativism*
3. Deontological Ethics
4. Divine Command Theory*
5. Ethical Egoism
6. Ethics*
7. Hedonism
8. Karma*
9. Morality
10. Moral Relativism*
11. Proletariat Morality*
12. Scientism
13. Situation Ethics
14. Teleological Ethics
15. Utilitarianism*
Key Verses:
1. Matthew 5-7
2. Luke 10:27
3. Romans 12:9
Key Players:
1. Joseph Fletcher
2. Thomas Hobbes
3. Immanuel Kant
4. John Stuart Mill
5. Friedrich Nietzsche
Key Works:
1. Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals
by Immanuel Kant
2. Leviathan by Thomas Hobbes
3. On the Genealogy of Morals by Friedrich
Nietzsche
4. Situation Ethics by Joseph Fletcher
5. Utilitarianism by John Stuart Mill
*Short answer or essay question on the exam


<!-- page-12 (book p.261) -->

CHAPTER 10 ASsIGNMENT
Hey there!
am so happy it is Christmas break. Finally I can have a few weeks to relax before the next semester
starts. Finals went well thanks to all those hours in the library. I can't believe how much I studied this
semester!I don't think I have ever studied so much in my life. Paige was a lifesaver on that Art History
paper. Anyway, lam going to spend this holiday sleeping (a lot!) and of course hanging out with you
and the rest of my old friends. I think I might also try to pick up a few games of soccer with my little
brother. He just joined the middle school team. It will be fun to show him the ropes while l am at home.
Hopefully I haven't lost my game since intramurals!
I had an interesting conversation with Muhammad and Nathan before school ended. While we
were working out at the gym, a news special on academic dishonesty was playing on the televisions.
Apparently a group of seniors at some university up north were expelled due to a huge cheating
scandal. That, of course, started us talking about cheating and dishonesty, which eventually led us to the
topic of ethics. Nathan shook his head and muttered something about karma. Naturally, I had heard of
karma before, but I wasn't quite sure what he meant. He went on to say that the consequences of what
we do for good or bad will eventually be returned back to us. This sounds very similar to Christianity,
since I think I remember the Bible saying something about how your sins will eventually find you out. Of
course, doubt it is that simple.
This started me thinking about what Sarah and Mark might say. I know they don't believe in
God or the Bible, so what do they base their ethical views on? Also, are they different? What is the
Secularist's basis for ethics? And what is the Marxist's basis for ethics? I can imagine Paige, as a
Postmodernist, would say that all truth is constructed and that we make our own truth, but what does
that mean for ethics? What do Postmodernists think about ethics? To some degree, I understand
Nathan's position, but what is the basis of ethics for New Spiritualists? Muhammad spoke up
and said that it isn't karma that ultimately judges our actions. It is Allah. If we continually break Allah's
law and act contrary to the example set by the prophet, then we will be eternally punished. I know that
Islam calls God "Allah, but I am not sure what the prophet Muhammad had to do with right and wrong.
And Christians believe that God gave us laws to obey. What is the difference between the Islamic
and Christian understanding of ethics?
Thanks a lot for helping me out with all my questions! Good thing I have such an intelligent friend
like you!
Talk to you later,
-Doug
- LOU-
