# Chapter 17

<!-- page-1 (book p.17) -->

UNIT
CHAPTER 17 LEARNING OBJECTIVES
Students will be able to:
1. articulate a synopsis of the history of history. [17.2]
2. describe what historians do. [17.3]
3. explain Secularism's approach to history. [17.4]
4. explain Marxism's approach to history. [17.5]
5. explain Postmodernism's approach to history. [17.6]
6. explain New Spirituality's approach to history. [17.7]
7. explain Islam's approach to history. [17.8]
8. explain Christianity's approach to history. [17.9]
- 4.4.5


<!-- page-2 (book p.447) -->

CHAPTER 17
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. What is history and why is it important to study it? [17.1]
History is the study of people and events from the past. Historians examine how influen-
tial people thought and lived and how their lives affected their world and ours. Certain
humans and events are worth remembering, studying, and learning from. There are
mistakes and errors worth avoiding and ideas and actions worth emulating.
Chapter 17.1 Activity
WHAT MAKES GREAT HISTORY?
Objective: Students will make a list of historical figures from A-Z and explain why each one
achieved a place in history.
1. Explain that students will have 10 minutes to make a list from A-Z and try to identify a his-
torical figure for each letter of the alphabet. Announce if students use the first or last name
for the alphabet letter, such as A: Anne Frank or Benedict Arnold. Inform them that they
must also write why that person is remembered in history.
2. After 10 minutes, begin with the letter A and have students call out their historical figure. If
two or more students name the same person, no point is awarded. If a student is the only
one with that historical figure and has a valid explanation of why the person is remembered
in history, the student scores a point.
3. Continue through the alphabet. Have students count up their points and declare the top
scorer as the top historian of the class.
2. Do you have a favorite period of history that interests you or a certain historical
figure that has influenced you?
Follow up questions:
1. What makes history exciting or boring to you?
2. Who and what from today will be highlighted by future historians?
3. Is history objective or is it shaped by the views of historians?
4. What's the best way to protect ourselves from inaccurate or biased history?
Who are some of the people who shaped our understanding of history? [17.2]
Herodotus is known as the father of history because of the way he gathered evidence,
verified it, and wrote about it. He focused on people and places and faithfully recorded
what he heard, even if it was mythical. Another Greek, Thucydides, focused on why
things happened as they did. Both men were celebrated by early leaders who thought
the examples of history, especially how great men gained and maintained power, helped
them rule more effectively.
Besides the Greeks, another group of careful historians was the ancient Hebrews.
In terms of general reliability... the Old Testament comes out remarkably well,
so long as its writings and writers are treated fairly and evenhandedly, in line with
independent data, open to all. (Kenneth Anderson Kitchen)
4. What are two dangers threatening the study of history today? [17.2]
The study of history is in trouble for two reasons First there are major disagreements
about what makes historical people and events important. For example, are only leaders
worth studying? If we only consider elected officials, the wealthy, or the "winners," we'll
miss the stories of ordinary people who did something that affected the course of history.
Choosing what to study is complicated because it's impossible to take into account all
the facts. A fact is something indisputably known to exist in reality. Historians can't take
into account every single fact. They have to discern carefully which facts had a shaping
influence. And who decides this?
It used to be said that facts speak for themselves. This is, of course, untrue. The facts
speak only when the historian calls on them; it is he who decides to which facts to
give the floor, and in what order or context. (E. Hallet Carr)
Second, people use history to advance their own agendas rather than as a search for truth.
The writers of Scripture are often accused of being biased in this way, but the reality is
different. The writers of Scripture seem to do their best to tell on themselves and reveal
unflattering details. This is uncharacteristic of those trying to amass personal power or
sway public opinion.
5. Is Christianity based on fact or faith? [17.2]
Christianity is based on historical facts. The biblical authors are saying, "Here are the
facts about what actually happened as God worked in the lives of people from the begin-
ning of time on into the future." The past matters. What people did then shows us what
to do and what not to do now. Taken as a whole, the Christian narrative of history has
profoundly shaped Western civilization.


<!-- page-3 (book p.499) -->

But today, history is being hijacked in the service of anti-Christian worldviews. That's
why we need intelligent, committed Christians to make history their vocation to tell the
story of what God has done and continues to do through flawed people to accomplish
his grand purposes.
6. What do historians do? [17.3]
For the philosopher G. E. W. Hegel and many historians, to study history is to interpret
the past in order to establish a story of how life is, which then justifies a vision of the
future. But this is very subjective because historians select facts they think are relevant
and ignore those they deem irrelevant. All of this is affected by their worldview.
As historians, we are caught up in our own bundles of interests, morals, ethics,
philosophies, ideas on how the world works, and why people do the things they
do. (John H. Arnold)
It is true that all historians have biases, but does this mean all accounts of history are
therefore false?
The reader of the historian's work must be discerning about whether the historian is re-
membering what really happened or merely what he wants to have happened. Historians
should reveal their assumptions to readers, and readers should see how the historians'
treatment of the facts stacks up to what else is known.
7. What's the difference between historiography and historicism? [17.3]
Historiography is the study of the methodology used to reconstruct historical events,
or, in simple terms, the writing of history. Historians look at past events and reconstruct
what happened in their minds so as to communicate it to their audience. Historians
have ten tools to work with, according to Hans Meyerhoff: subject matter, facts, primary
aim, language, fact/theory/interpretation, methods, explanations, freedom, values, and
meaning.
Historicism is when historians go beyond the writing of history and project an interpreta-
tion of history onto the future. It is rooted in the belief that events are either determined
or influenced by discernable patterns that can be seen throughout history.
[Historicism is] an approach to the social sciences which assumes that historical
prediction is their only aim, and which assumes that this aim is attainable by dis-
covering the "rhythms" or the "patterns, the "laws" or the "trends" that underlie
the evolution of history. (Karl Popper)
Most historians are suspicious of historicism because it promotes relativism in the sense
that what we count as true depends on what we want to be true. It also promotes deter-
minism, the idea that we are ruled by an inescapable fate. Determinism is the belief that
all events, including human actions, are the inevitable and necessary results of previous
actions.
CHAPTER DISCUSSION DUESTION
Chapter 17.3 Activity
WHAT DO HISTORIANS DO?
Objective: Students will analyze a historical movie and present three historical accuracies and
one historical inaccuracy.
1. Discuss how media can affect historicism.
2. Have each student research a historical movie or use a movie he or she has already viewed.
Direct students to write three historical accuracies of the movie and one inaccuracy that
was portrayed in the movie.
3. Select a student to read his or her movie "facts" and have the class identify the inaccuracy.
Discuss how that inaccuracy affects viewers perspective of that historical event or person's life.
4. Continue until all students have shared their movie "facts. Take a poll among the students to
see how many of them have actually researched or cared to know the facts about a histori-
cal movie and in the future how many of them will research facts about historical movies.
8. What does Secularism assume about history? [174]
* The basic assumption Secularism makes about history has to do with social progress.
Social progress is the belief that society will continually improve through human ini-
tiative. Secularists share the sense most Westerners have that things are getting better
over time. Secularists believe history to be the evolution of both organisms and human
society-from the simple to the complex, from weaker to stronger.
Progress is inevitable. The idea that it is built into the very laws of nature can be traced
back to Herbert Spencer. He believed progress was "not an accident, not a thing within
human control, but a beneficent necessity. Secularists enthusiastically embrace the as-
sumption that society will evolve in the direction smart people think it should go.
Nazism and Marxism temporarily frustrated Secularists' infatuation with progress. Their
brutality made a farce of optimism. But where some saw only bleakness, others saw dignity.
Chaos may reign, but the brave mock fate and press on. Out of chaos we form our own
meaning. "No deity will save us; we must save ourselves," says the Humanist Manifesto II.


<!-- page-4 (book p.451) -->

Chapter 17.4 Activity
SECULARISM
Objective: Students will present three examples that prove the Bible is historically accurate.
1. Discuss why Secularism is so intent on discounting the Bible as historically accurate.
2. Have students work in pairs to find three examples that prove the Bible is historically
accurate.
3. Allow time for each pair to present their examples and answer questions from other stu-
dents about their examples.
4. After everyone has presented, ask the class how Secularists might discount the examples as
not really proving the Bible is historically accurate. Guide students to see that when some-
one does not want to acknowledge God, they refuse to accept "facts." Invite volunteers to
pray for people who do not believe in God or the historical accuracy of the Bible to encoun-
ter truth, have their eyes opened, and have the courage to step out in faith and believe God
and His Word.
9. Where do Secularists think history is headed? [17.4]
Secularists like Erich Fromm think humanity is on the cusp of a new stage in history,
a new messianic age.
The messianic time is the next step in history, not its abolition. The messianic time
is the time when man will have been fully born. When man was expelled from
Paradise he lost his home; in the messianic time he will be at home again-in the
world. (Erich Fromm)
For most Secularists, the goal of history is a future paradise on earth. Victor J. Stenger
thinks technology will enable the evolution of humans to even higher states. This will
come about not "by the painfully slow and largely random process of biological evolu-
tion," he says, "but through the rapid and guided advances of technology."
The course of history is determined, yet humans will bring about progress through the
exercise of free will—a contradiction many Secularists won't acknowledge.
Within certain limits prescribed by our earthly circumstances and by scientific
law, individual human beings, entire nations, and mankind in general are free to
choose the paths that they truly wish to follow. To a significant degree they are the
molders of their own fate and hold in their own hands the shape of things to come.
(Corliss Lamont)
10. What does Marxism assume about history? [17.5]
Marxism views history from the standpoint of atheism, dialectical materialism, and
naturalism. History is simply an account of "matter in motion." God has nothing to do
with it. Matter obeys specific laws in the universe, particularly the laws of dialectical
materialism, which declare economic structures will eventually evolve into communism.
According to Marxism, society is guided by nature through progressive socioeconomic
phases: tribalism, slavery, feudalism, capitalism, socialism, and ultimately communism.
This theory is called historical materialism. History is driven by the class struggle between
the bourgeoisie (thesis) and proletariat (antithesis). Societies will inevitably move from
capitalism through socialism to a classless and stateless utopian society-communism
(synthesis).
If history is completely determined by the dialectical laws, it wouldn't really matter
what humans do. But Marxists need action that leads to revolution, so they developed
a limited version of free will, distinguishing between being totally free and being free
within the constraints of history.
Men make their own history, but they do not make it just as they please; they do
not make it under circumstances chosen by themselves, but under circumstances
directly encountered, given and transmitted from the past. (Karl Marx)
11. How do Marxists view the study of history? [17.5]
Marxists call into question the objectivity of all views of history except their own.
Objectivity is impossible and it is also undesirable... because if you have any kind
of a social aim... then it requires that you make your selection on the basis of what
you think will advance causes of humanity. (Howard Zinn)
Howard Zinn, a Marxist historian, is famous for reinterpreting America's history from
the perspective of class warfare. His book A People's History of the United States is a
popular textbook in universities. Citing other Marxist historians, he's not interested in
whether his telling of history is consistent with previous historical work. Marxists think
their own view of history is objectively true as correctly told and interpreted. For them,
writing history involves interpreting events in order to highlight certain words and


<!-- page-5 (book p.453) -->

feelings, coaching the reader into seeing what they see, i.e. class struggle. The task of the
historian is to organize facts about the past to show the futility of prolonging capitalism.
History is fixed. Capitalism will die. The bourgeoisie will collapse. Marxism will win.
12. What does Postmodernism assume about history? [17.6]
Postmodernism assumes that objectivity is impossible. It questions the idea of "facts" and
sees all historical accounts as fiction. Historians are fooling themselves and their read-
ers by striving for objectivity. Each historical period has its own social system through
which it generates its own norms. No one outside of that particular period can really
understand it.
Postmodernists use deconstruction to show that historians are unwittingly operating
in the service of so-called universal truths that secure power for the elite and oppress
Chapter 17.6 Activity
POSTMODERNISM
Objective: Students will take pictures and decide if their pictures show a "fact" that can or
cannot be questioned as fact.
• Materials Needed: cell phone or camera
1. Discuss why Postmodernists question facts.
2. Direct students to choose a partner and brainstorm ideas of how they could use a cell
phone or camera to take a picture of a "fact" that someone could question and a picture of a
"fact" that no one could question.
3. Allow time for students to set up and take at least two pictures.
4. Have each pair show their pictures to the class. Direct the class to identify what the "fact" of
the picture is and whether it could be questioned as a fact.
5. Continue until all pairs have presented their pictures. Discuss what sources students are
willing to accept as a true fact and how they will discern a fact from a non-fact.
PHAPTER LE DISCUSSION OUESTIONS
everyone else. Postmodernists approach history in a similar manner as Marxists, but
instead of focusing on the oppressed working class, they focus on oppressed groups.
Some radical Postmodernists see no ultimate purpose in history, advocating nihilism.
Nihilism is the view that the world and human existence are without meaning, purpose,
or essential value.
13. For Postmodernists, what is the task of the historian? [17.6]
Since objective truth can't be known, Postmodernists like Michel Foucault thought the
historian should study the past to see how those in power have used historical arguments
to secure their power. He believed history was a fiction—a way of organizing arguments
we cannot know to be true that lead the reader to conclusions we wish them to reach.
In this approach, Postmodernists are heavily influenced by Marxism. Both are commit-
ted to historical revisionism. Historical revisionism involves reinterpreting the past to
serve an ideological purpose—in this case, seeing how some unjustly wrest power from
others in relation to economics, race, gender, sexual orientation, and in every other area
where the powerful oppress the weak.
Social historians are often driven by activist goals. Historical research becomes not
an attempt to understand the past but a propaganda tool for use in modern political
and social power struggles. (Tom Dixon)
14. What does New Spirituality assume about history? [17.7]
New Spirituality views history as the record of our spiritual evolutionary progress to-
ward perfection. All that really exists is consciousness, and we can tap into this reality
to change the world. We need to realize our true power to accelerate evolution. The
term evolutionary godhood has been used to describe this idea that we are progressing
through history toward the ultimate goal of realizing our own divinity.
If new, higher states of being can solve our problems, there's no point in understand-
ing history except to name the dogmas we have outgrown. New Spiritualists claim that
theistic religions were helpful at a certain time in the past, but we have outgrown them.
The old-time religion belongs to another age, another people, another set of human
values, another universe. By going back you throw yourself out of sync with history.
(Joseph Campbell)
15. What form of religion does New Spirituality think is appropriate for the modern
age? [17.7]
Monotheistic religions are no longer relevant. New Spirituality is the only appropri-
ate religion for the modern age as it alone can foster our evolutionary leap into higher
consciousness and godhood.


<!-- page-6 (book p.455) -->

N.K.
God wants us to become Himself (or Herself or Itself). We are growing toward god-
hood. God is the goal of evolution. It is God who is the source of the evolutionary
force and God who is the destination. This is what we mean when we say that He
is the Alpha and the Omega, the beginning and the end. (M. Scott Peck)
Biological evolution has brought us this far, but only spiritual evolution will get us to the
next state. We can speed up the process by rejecting our beliefs about what is true, good,
and beautiful and work harder at tapping into the higher consciousness.
Every individual's consciousness is connected to, and is a part of, the mass con-
sciousness. When a small but significant number of individuals have moved into a
new level of awareness and significantly changed their behavior, that change is felt
in the entire mass consciousness. (Shakti Gawain)
16. What does Islam assume about history? [17.8]
Islam has a sense of historical inevitability, just like Secularism, Marxism, and New
Spirituality. But the Islamic worldview believes that what will happen in the future is
because of what has happened in the past, and that history is directed by a divine hand.
The world is a becoming entity, created by the will of a Designer and sustained by
Him for meaningful purposes. Historical currents take place in accordance with
His will and follow established laws. They are not directed by blind chance, nor are
they random and disorderly incidents. (Hammuda Abdalati)
The term "pan-Islam" best captures the essence of the Islamic approach to history. Pan-
Islam is the belief that the world should bejunited under a global Islamic state Tihad,
the Muslim equivalent of evangelism, is the vehicle. Jihad is the inner spiritual battle of
every Muslim to fulfill his or her religious duties and the outer physical struggle against
the enemies of Islam.
Most Muslims hold a moderate view in which the aggressive nature of Islamic teaching
and practice has been curbed by such realities as the Western values of civic tolerance
and pluralism. Yet there are still a significant number of Muslims, whom we would call
Islamists, who believe all humanity will one day bow to Allah freely or by force.)
17. How does the Islamic view of history justify a global Islamic state? [17.8]
Because of its understanding of Allah's nature, character, and purpose, Islam freely pur-
sues its global agenda without fear of social sanction or regard to what other worldviews
think. They don't have to fit into a pluralistic world because they will prevail.
Islam is the only future hope of humanity, and its victorious emergence out of the
present ideological warfare is the only guarantee of man's salvation. (Muhammad
CHAPTER 17 DISCUSSION QUESTION:
And because Allah does not follow natural laws, Muslims are not obligated to understand
the world or to use their minds to have dominion over it. Their view of history does not
require them to imagine a fanciful utopia to come; it demands obedience to God who
is working his will in the world.
18. Can Islam and Christianity peacefully coexist in the twenty-first century?
[Answers will vary.]
19. What does Christianity assume about history? [17.9]
From the Christian perspective, history is an unfolding of God's ultimate plan for hu-
manity in real time. It is a narrative of redemption in which God buys back those who
are made in his image; thus we call it a redemptive narrative. Redemptive narrative is
the Christian metanarrative that describes history unfolding according to the biblical
chronicle of
• God's creative act,
• humanity's rebellion,
• Christ's redemptive sacrifice,
• and God's eventual restoration of creation.
Even though God's initial creation was "very good," humans rebelled. God has revealed
in Jesus Christ his ultimate plan for divine intervention, redemption, and restoration.
The idea of the redeeming purposes of God implies his constant supervision, a direction
for the course of human events, and an ultimate goal. History is moving in a direction!
The basis for the Christian worldview appeared in history about two thousand years
ago. Jesus Christ died for our sins in the past, he is a guide to the present, and he is a
promise for the future.
20. How does Christianity make sense of the past in light of Christ's sacrifice? [17.9]
Christianity makes specific claims about past events and ties its claims to truth to those
events. The Bible invites scrutiny with its historical claims about what happened when,
where, and to whom. It is possible to find evidence to prove or disprove its account. The
Bible insists that either Christ is a historical figure and the Bible is a historical document
that records real events in the life of Christ, or that the Christian faith is bankrupt.
And if Christ has not been raised, then our preaching is in vain and your faith is
in vain. We are even found to be misrepresenting God, because we testified about
God that he raised Christ, whom he did not raise if it is true that the dead are not
raised. (1 Cor. 15:14-15)
With good support, Christians believe their faith is anchored in historical truth.
HUS TOKY


<!-- page-7 (book p.457) -->

21. How does Christianity make sense of the present in light of Christ's sacrifice? [17.9]
According to the Christian view of history, the big picture of God's story invests our
lives with purpose.
Where a God who is totally purposive and totally foreseeing acts upon a Nature
which is totally interlocked, there can be no accidents or loose ends, nothing whatever
of which we can safely use the word "merely." Nothing is "merely a by-product" of
anything else. All results are intended from the first. (C. S. Lewis)
The belief that history has a direction is known as a linear conception of history. It holds
that history follows a chronological pattern of cause and effect. It had a specific begin-
ning (creation) and is being directed by God toward a specific end (restoration). Prior
to Christianity's influence, pagans held to a cyclical conception of history, believing
events were repeated over and over by consecutive societies.
Living as if every minute in our day is charged with meaning enables us to see our place
in the entire scope and flow of history.
Chapter 17.9 Activity
CHRISTIANITY
Objective: Students will list examples that show how God has made Himself known through-
out American history.
1. Divide the class into small groups. Set a time limit and have the groups brainstorm a list
of examples from American history when they believe God made Himself known or inter-
vened. For example, on September 11, 2001, some people believe it was God's grace or
intervention that thwarted the plan of the fourth plane and kept it from reaching its target.
2. Select a group to read its list to the class. If any other group has the same event, have them
compare the reasons why they felt it showed God making himself known.
3. After all groups have read their lists, let students give current world news examples of God
making Himself known to the world.
CHAPTER E DISCUSSION OUESTIONS
22. How does Christianity make sense of the future in light of Christ's sacrifice? [17.9]
The Bible's promise of a future kingdom ushered in by Jesus Christ is far more hopeful than
any utopian scheme. Jesus is described as the "the Alpha and the Omega," the beginning
and the end of history (Rev. 1:8). D. W. Bebbington says that since Jesus won the battle
against evil on the cross, "The outcome of world history is therefore already assured.
God will continue to direct the course of events up to their end when the outcome will
be made plain." At the end of all things, the day of judgment (Acts 17:31; Rom. 2:12-16)
Will make Christ's victory over sin apparent to all.
And yet the Bible doesn't tell Christians to sit back and let God do the work. Christians
are to exercise stewardship over creation and follow the example of Jesus Christ in en-
gaging the world. In God's plan, the difficulties we face in a fallen world have meaning
and an ultimate reward.
For I consider that the sufferings of this present time are not worth comparing
with the glory that is to be revealed to us. For the creation waits with eager longing
for the revealing of the sons of God. For the creation was subjected to futility, not
willingly, but because of him who subjected it, in hope that the creation itself will
be set free from its bondage to corruption and obtain the freedom of the glory of
the children of God. (Rom. 8:18-21)
HIS ORY


<!-- page-8 -->

"CENSORING THE PAST" READING
Censorship is a mandate by the civil government which prohibits the publication, sale, or
distribution of material it deems to be politically harmful. Legally, censorship in violation
of the First Amendment can only take place when an agent or agency of the state suppresses
speech.
But censorship is far broader and more dangerous in today's secular world. In Censoring the
Past, Gary DeMar asks and answers some key questions about censorship:
• What is censorship?
• When is it appropriate?
• Who draws the line?
DeMar examines censorship in such places as libraries, public schools, the news media, and
the entertainment business (Hollywood). He illustrates the anti-Christian bias of many self-
appointed censors whose "editing" extends from rewriting history to the selective coverage
of international news.
The removal of religion from textbooks is a major area of concern. DeMar notes, "Since the
nineteenth century, secularists have been gradually chipping away at the historical record,
denying the impact Christianity has had on the development of the moral character of the
United States."
As you read this essay, what areas of censorship are the most troubling to you?
CENSORING THE PAST
by Gary DeMar
There is a lot of talk today about censorship. Recent art exhibits, funded by tax dol-
lars and promoted by the National Endowment for the Arts, have come under severe
attack. Many Americans rightly criticize these exhibits as inappropriate, certainly
for viewing, but most assuredly for government support and funding. Museums,
government-funded artists, Hollywood activists, homosexual groups, and the gov-
ernment-funded NEA (National Endowment for the Arts)' are crying "censorship"
over such protests.
Another battle is raging over the selling of pornography in popularly trafficked book-
stores. Rev. Donald Wildmon and his American Family Association have targeted
Waldenbooks, a subsidiary of K-Mart, for selling pornography. Harry Hoffman,
president of Waldenbooks, says that Wildmon and others like him "want to censor
and stop the sales of constitutionally protected publications they deem objectionable."
*Protests against pornography and government-funded art are not acts of censorship.
Censorship is a mandate by the civil government which prohibits the publication,
sale, or distribution of material it deems to be politically harmful. As civil libertarian
Nat Hentoff describes it. Legally, censorship in violation of the First Amendment #: DEFEATEN
can only take place when an agent or agency of the state—a public school principal,
a congressman, a President-suppresses speech."
It is not censorship for a government to refuse to pay for objectionable material. In
the case of pornographic "art," the protestors are only asking that their tax money not
be used to fund the offensive material. Rev. Wildmon is not asking the government to
prohibit Waldenbooks from selling Playboy and Penthouse; he is only calling on con-
cerned citizens to stop doing business with K-Mart and its subsidiaries. He wants the
same freedoms that the pornographers are claiming belong only to them. Wildmon
writes: "We don't want K-Mart, Playboy and Penthouse drawing the line for the rest
of us. The First Amendment belongs to all Americans, not just to pornographers."
The Censor Band Wagon
Literature of all types has been scrutinized by numerous groups from different ends
of the political and religious spectrum. Those on the political left have denounced
classic works like Charles Dickens' Oliver Twist as being "anti-semitic." William
Shakespeare's King Lear has been condemned as "sexist." Tom Sawyer, Mark Twain's
coming-of-age classic, has suffered a double blow with denouncements of "racism"
and "sexism." Beatrix Potter's Peter Rabbit and Benjamin Bunny have been criticized
"because they are about middle-class rabbits."6
n 1988, librarians in Cobb County, Georgia, removed Nancy Drew and The Hard,
Boys from the library shelves. The librarians cited lack of shelf space as the reason fo
the exclusion of the popular mystery series. Mary Louis Rheay, director of the Cobb
County Library System, tells a different story, saying that "series books are poorly
written and do not meet library standards for book selection." In 1994 the library
[board in Wellesley, Massachusetts, voted 5 to 1 to keep Playboy on the shelves. The
board said the magazine, like all its material, is protected by free speech provisions.
"There is something in the library to offend everyone," librarian Anne Reynolds
said. "We cannot be in the position of censoring everything. Those days are gone."
Trustee Carol Gleason, who voted to remove the magazine, said, "If minors cannot
buy the magazine in a store, why should they be able to obtain it in the library?"
Who Draws the Line?
An ad hoc public school committee supported the removal of books by Dr. James Dob-
son, a Christian psychologist, from the library of the Early Childhood Family Education
Program of the Mankato, Minnesota, school system. They were removed because the
* staff disagreed with Dobson's views on child discipline, which includes an endorsement
of spanking, and because of the religious nature of his philosophy?"
Donated books are often refused by libraries because of religious content. The Closing
of the American Heart, written by Dr. Ronald H. Nash, was donated to the Haggard
* 4.59 -


<!-- page-9 (book p.461) -->

Wve
EDUCATES.
DRIVES
WHAT IS KARED!
Wo DEGEDES
The STANDARDS:
OF WIT IS Allowe
Library in Plano, Texas, by a group of concerned citizens. Nash is a former professor
of religion and philosophy at Western Kentucky University who presently teaches
at Reformed Theological Seminary in Orlando, Florida. He has also served as an
advisor to the United States Civil Rights Commission. Why was his book refused?
Certainly not because of his academic and professional credentials. Book donations
had to pass the library's evaluation criteria. '° The Closing of the American Heart did
or pass because of its Christian perspective.
Each year People for the American Way (PAW), a liberal political advocacy group,
publishes a report on censorship and "book banning." Most of the books which are
brought into question deal with occultic themes, promiscuous sexual content, and
advocacy of homosexuality. Most of the protestors are parents who send their children
to government controlled (public) schools. PAW considers such parental concern over
what children read "attacks on the freedom to learn."'' What PAW does not tell its un-
suspecting audience is that incidents of so-called censorship are negligible compared
to the number of schools and libraries in existence. For example, the most challenged
book, Scary Stories to Tell in the Dark, "was challenged only 7 times out of 84,000 pub-
lic schools andfever femoved. In fact, Kristi Harrick, press secretary for the Family
Research Council, reports that "none of the most challenged books were censored."!2
Eric Buehrer, a former public-school teacher and president of Gateways to Better
Education in Lake Forest, California, states that "PAW has confused the issues of
material selection and censorship. What used to be called discernment is now called
censorship."3 Why is it called "censorship" when parents apply standards for book
selection but called "meeting library standards" when a librarian evaluates a book?
Judgments are constantly made as to what children should read and what books
should appear on library shelves. As we've seen, librarians appeal to "library standards"
when selecting books. There is nothing wrong with having "standards.
Unfortunately, these library standards" are neither applied consistently in libraries
and school, no always reported in the same way by the press. * It seems that when
concerned Christian parents voice objections to the content of books, they are said to
MAJOR
be censors. But when books with Christian themes are refused by libraries or when
teachers are denied the right to read a Bible silently during a reading period, ' we
such actions by libraries and schools said to be "censorship" by even the strongest
learn that the rejection is based upon the religious nature of the literature. Rarely are * KilKaro
opponents of book banning.
Will the Real Censors Please Stand Up
It is instructive how one segment of our society screams "censorship" every time its
views are questioned, but when Christians claim "censorship" of the facts of history,
they are ignored by the guardians of the First Amendment.
Liberal media coverage of world events is just one example of the anti-Christian bias
of mainstream contemporary society. Consider journalistic coverage of events in
Eastern Europe. Rev. Laszlo Tokes, the Hungarian pastor who sparked the Rumanian
- 40U -
MAXES
Revolution, stated that "Eastern Europe is not just in a political revolution
religious renaissance." How many people read in their local newspapers or saw
on the evening news that Rev. Tokes believed he had been saved from execution
rough "divine intervention"? Explicitly Christian themes are regularly excludec
om news articles: "References to Jesus, the "Christian spirit, and Czechoslovakia
role as the 'spiritual crossroads of Europe were omitted from excerpts of President
Vaclav Havel's New Year's Day address. The New York Times, The Washington Post,
and Newsweek were among the sinful censors."16
None of these examples should surprise the informed Christian. The present educa-
tional establishment, to cite just one group, has been obscuring the past so that our
children have no way of comparing the facts of history with the distorted version
promoted by biased secular historians.
REAL
Censorship at Work in the Classroom
Public school textbooks are fertile ground for the seeds of willful historical decep-
tion. Paul C. Vitz, professor of psychology at New York University, spent months of
careful analysis of sixty textbooks used in elementary schools across the country.
The study was sponsored by the National Institute on Education. The texts were
examined in terms of their references to religion, either directly or indirectly. "In
grades 1 through 4 these books introduce the child to U.S. society-to family life,
community activities, ordinary economic transactions, and some history. None of the
books covering grades 1 through 4 contain one word referring to any religious activity
in contemporary American life." Dr. Vitz offers an example of how this translates
WHAT IS OMITED?
wHy?
into the real world of classroom instruction:
Some particular examples of the bias against religion are significant. One social studies
book has thirty pages on the Pilgrims, including the first Thanksgiving. But there is
not one word or image) that referred to religion as even a part of the Pilgrims' life.
One mother whose son is in a class using this book wrote me to say that he came home
and told her that "Thanksgiving was when the Pilgrims gave thanks to the Indians."
The mother called the principal of this suburban New York City school to point out
that Thanksgiving was when the Pilgrims thanked God. The principal responded by
saying "that was her opinion" - the schools could only teach what was in the books! WHo MAKES ThaT
- In 1986 school children in Seattle, Washington, were given a large dose of revisionist
history in the booklet Teaching about Thanksgiving. The children were told that "the
ALL!
Pilgrims were narrow-minded bigots who survived initially only with the Indian's
help, but turned on them when their help wasn't needed anymore." The Pilgrims "had
something up their sleeves other than friendship when they invited the Indians to a
Thanksgiving feast, and it was the Indians who ended up bringing most of the food,
anyway" The booklet has obvious biases and is filled with historical inaccuracies.
For example, supposedly Increase Mather preached a sermon in 1623 where he
reportedly "gave special thanks to God for the plague of smallpox which had wiped
out the majority of Wampanoag Indians, praising God for destroying 'chiefly young
men and children, the very seeds of increase, thus clearing the forests for a better


<!-- page-10 (book p.405) -->

INACCURATE! WHy DO PEaRk NOT O
growth." This sermon could not have been preached by Increase Mather, at least
not in 1623, because he was not born until 1639.
The rewriting of history has even reached the pages of the Sunday comics. A story
recently appeared about "Squanto and the First Thanksgiving." As all children know,
Squanto was a great help to the Pilgrims. But was Squanto so much of a help that the
first Thanksgiving was given in his honor? According to the author of the Squanto
column, we learn that "the Pilgrims so appreciated Squanto's generosity that they
had a great feast to show their thanks."2 William Bradford, governor of Plymouth
and the colony's first historian, continually makes reference to "the Lord Who never
fails," "God's blessing," and "the Providence of God," in times of both plenty and
want." How uncharacteristic it would have been for the Plymouth settlers to ignore
thanking God during a time of harvest. Edward Winslow, in his important chronicle
of the history of Plymouth, reports the following eyewitness account of the colony's
thanksgiving celebration:
Our harvest being gotten in, our governor sent four men out fowling, that so we
might, after a special manner, rejoice together after we had gathered the fruit of our
labors. They four in one day killed as much fowl as, with a little help beside, served
the company almost a week. At which time, among other recreations, we exercised
our arms, many of the Indians coming among us, and among the rest their greatest
king, Massasoit, with some ninety men, whom for three days we entertained and
feasted; and they went out and killed five deer, which they brought to the plantation,
and bestowed on our governor, and upon the captain and others. And although it
be not always so plentiful as it was at this time with us, yet by the goodness of God
we are so far from want, that we often wish you partakers of our plenty? J
Squanto was an example of God's providential care of the Pilgrims. He taught them how
to farm in the New World and led them on trading expeditions. There is no doubt that
these early Christian settlers thanked the "Indians" in general and Squanto in particular
for their generosity in supplying venison to supplement the Pilgrims' meager Thanks-
giving rations. As the historical record shows, however, thanksgiving was ultimately
made to God ("Governor Bradford, with one eye on divine Providence, proclaimed
a day of thanksgiving to God, and with the other eye on the local political situation,
extended an invitation to neighboring Indians to share in the harvest feast.... This first
Thanksgiving' was a feast called to suit the needs of the hour, which were to celebrate
the harvest, thank the Lord for His goodness, and regale and impress the Indians"4
Censorship through Creative Editing
Dr. Vitz is not the only person to uncover the way public school texts minimize the
role that Christianity played in the founding of our nation. Consider how a teacher's
guide for the high school history text Triumph of the American Nation, published in
1986, omits material from the Mayflower Compact without informing the teacher that
the document has been edited. Students in discussing the document are left with an
incomplete understanding of what motivated these early founders because they do not
have all the facts. The Mayflower Compact is depicted solely as a political document
with its more striking religious elements deleted. Here is the document as presented by
the textbook company. The bold face portions are missing from the textbook version:
In the name of God, Amen. We whose names are underwritten, the loyal subjects
of our dread sovereign lord, King James, by the grace of God, of Great Britain,
France, and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc., having undertaken for the
glory of God and advancement of the Christian faith and honor of our king and
country, a voyage to plant the first colony in the northern parts of Virginia, do by
these presents solemnly and in the presence of God, and one another, covenant
and combine ourselves together into a civil body politic....2
These brave men and women had more on their minds than political freedom. Mis-
sionary zeal and the advancement of the Christian faith were their primary motivations
as they risked life and property to carve out a new home in an uncertain wilderness.
The critics of America's early Christian origins have steadily removed such references
from textbooks and have created a tense legal environment that frightens many teach-
ers from even raising evidence contradicting the censored texts. Will a member of
the ACLU threaten legal action against a teacher who decides to cite original source
material to support a view that differs from the historical perspective of the textbook?
Hollywood History
The entertainment industry has entered the field of creative editing in an animated
version of the story of Pocahontas, the Native American woman who pleaded with
her father to spare the life of John Smith. Pocahontas later became a Christian and
married another colonist, John Rolfe. But this episode will all be deleted from an
animated retelling of the story. Kendall Hamilton of Newsweek offers the following
report on the newly designed and politically correct Pocahontas:
The film's P.C. prospects are... helped by the exclusion of Pocahontas's potentially, er,
problematic later years, in which she was kidnapped by settlers and, after converting
to Christianity, married one of her captors. Male-domination fantasy! Subversion of
morally superior indigenous culture! Well, maybe, but [Producer James] Pentecost
says such considerations weren't a factor: "We didn't really sidestep any of it for any
reason other than this was the most direct way to tell the story and the clearest."
Pass the peace pipe.26
While this might be the official explanation from Disney, my guess is that the studio
was pressured by Native Americans to hide Pocahontas's "mistake" of rejecting her
native religion.
William Holmes McGuffey's Eclectic Readers
A study of the historical record reveals that religion played a major role in the develop-
ment of the public school curriculum. "Textbooks referred to God without embarrass-
ment, and public schools considered one of their major tasks to be the development
of character through the teaching of religion. For example, the New England Prime


<!-- page-11 (book p.405) -->

opened with religious admonitions followed by the Lord's Prayer, the Apostles' Creed,
the Ten Commandments, and the names of the books of the Bible?"
The most widely used textbook series in public schools from 1836 to 1920 were Wil-
liam Holmes McGuffey's Eclectic Readers. More than 120 million Readers were sold
during this period. The Readers stressedreligion and its relationship to morality and
the proper use of knowledge. In an introduction for a reissue of the Fifth Reader,
historian Henry Steele Commager writes:
What was the nature of the morality that permeated the Readers? It was deeply
religious, and... religion then meant a Protestant Christianity.... The world of the
McGuffeys was a world where no one questioned the truths of the Bible or their
relevance to everyday contact.
The Readers, therefore, are filled with stories from
the Bible, and tributes to its truth and beauty.?
Competing textbooks of the same era contained varying amounts of biblical mate-
rial, but McGuffey's contained the greatest amount—"more than three times as much
as any other text of the period." Subsequent editions of the Readers 1857 and
18792 showed a reduction in the amount of material devoted to biblical themes.
Even so, the 1879 edition contained the Sermon on the Mount, two selections from
the Book of Psalms, the Lord's Prayer, the story of the death of Absalom (2 Samuel
18), and Paul's speech on the Areopagus (Acts 17). The Bible was still referred to
as "the Book of God, a source of inspiration, an important basis for life, and was
cited in support of particular moral issues.*30
Antiseptic Texts
Since the nineteenth century, secularists have been gradually chipping away at the
historical record, denying the impact Christianity has had on the development of
the moral character of the United States. In 1898 Bishop Charles Galloway delivered
a series of messages in the Chapel at Emory College in Georgia. In his messages he
noted that "books on the making of our nation have been written, and are the texts
1 our colleges, in which the Christian religior, as associal and civil factor, has on
cant or apologetic mention. This is either a fatal oversight or a deliberate purpos
nd both alike to be deplored and condemned. A nation ashamed of its ancestr
→ will be despised by itsposterity!' Forule GERATIO
The 1980s saw an even greater expurgation of the impact the Christian religion
has had on our nation. So much so that even People for the American Way had
to acknowledge that religion is often overlooked in history textbooks: "Religion is
simply not treated as a significant element in American life- it is not portrayed as
an integrated part of the American value system or as something that is important
to individual Americans." A 1994 study of history textbooks commissioned by the
federal government and drafted by the National Center for History in the Schools at
UCLA concluded that religion "was foolishly purged from many recent textbooks."
In 1990, Warren A. Nord of the University of North Carolina wrote:
What cannot be doubted is that our ways of thinking about nature, morality, art,
and society were once (and for many people still are) fundamentally religious, and
still today in our highly secular world it is difficult even for the non-religious to
extricate themselves entirely from the webs of influence and meaning provided by
our religious past.... To understand history and (historical literature one must
understand a great deal about religion: on this all agree. Consequently, the relative
absence of religion from history textbooks is deeply troubling.*
The removal of the topic of religion from textbooks is not always motivated by a desire
to slam Christianity. Textbook publishers fear special interest groups that scrutinize
the material for any infraction, whether it be religious, racial, sexual, or ethnic. For
example, "the 1990 Houghton Mifflin elementary series first made special efforts to
include material (and in state hearings received savage criticism from militant Jews,
Muslims, and fundamentalist Christians)*35 The easiest way to placate these diverse
groups is to remove all discussion of the topic. This deletion of material is either
outright censorship or else a reluctance to fight ideological wars, but whatever the
case, failure to deal factually with the past distorts a student's historical perspective.
This has happened to such an extent that even when religious themes are covered
"their treatments are uniformly antiseptic and abstract."
(ELECION:
→ Way IS
IT WANING
IN ITS
INFLUENCE
This essay originally appeared as a chapter in Gary DeMar, Americ's Christian History: The Untold Story, (Atlanta:
American Vision, 1994), pp. 21-34. Reproduction rights granted by Gary DeMar and American Vision.
' Miriam Horn with Andy Plattner, "Should Congress censor art?" U.S. News and World Report (September 25,
1989), 22, 24; Bo Emerson, "Civil War over Censorship: Morality is the Issue on Battlefield of Culture," Atlanta
Journal/Constitution (July 25, 1990), D1; and "Four artists to NEA: Who are you to judge?" The Atlanta Constitu-
tion (March 19, 1991), B6.
2 Harry Hoffman, "Protect the Right to Buy and Sell Books," USA Today (April 25, 1990), 10A.
3 Nat Hentoff, Free Speech for Me— But Not for Thee: How the American Left and Right Relentlessly Censor Each Other
(New York: HarperCollins, 1992), 2.
* Those who promote liberal causes are not opposed to boycotts of companies and products they deem objection-
able from their perspectve. Ultra-liberal lerust groups promote working Assets Long Distance service as a way
of funding radical groups such as Planned Parenthood, Greenpeace, Rainforest Action Network, and over 100
other action groups. One of their tactics is the promotion of "boycotts and buycotts" See Cathy Lynn Grossman,
"Boycotting is popular resort for activists, USA Today (October 11, 1994), 4D.
' Donald C. Wildmon, "Protect the Right to Boycott Pornography," USA Today (April 25, 1990), 10A.
• Joseph W. Grigg, "Peter Rabbit banned from London schools," Atlanta Journal/Constitution (April 7, 1988), IA.
7 Peggie R. Elgin, "Hardy Boys banned from Cobb libraries," Marietta Daily Journal (January 13, 1988), 1A.
8 "Residents want "Playboy' out of library," Marietta Daily Journal (October 18, 1994), 4A.
" Willmar Thorkelson, "Book Ban Considered," Washington Post (September 1, 1990).
' Reported in "Texas Report," a supplement to the Christian American (July/ August 1992).
" PAW evaluation reported in Andrew Mollison, "Group says efforts to ban schoolbooks focus on alleged satanic,
occult content," Atlanta Constitution (August 29, 1991), A11.
12 "PAW Cries Censor-Wolf: Attempt to Keep Parents Out of Schools, Says FRC" Family Research Council Press
Release (August 31, 1994), 1.
" Quoted in "The great 'censorship' hoax," Citizen (September 19, 1994), 8.
" David Shaw, "Abortion Bias Seeps Into News," reprinted from Los Angeles Times (July 1-4, 1990) and Al Knight,
"School races turn nasty, Denver Post (October 10, 1993), ID and SD. Knight writes: "The term religious right,
in the hands of PFAW and other groups, has become one of the most elastic political labels in memory. It is rou-
tinely stretched to include nearly anyone who might be motivated either by conservative or by religious or moral
concerns" (ID).
15 John W. Whitehead, The Rights of Religious Persons in Public Education: A Complete Resource for Knowing and
Exercising Your Rights in Public Education, rev. ed. (Wheaton, IL: Crossway Books, [1991] 1994), 112-13.
1 Barbara Reynolds, "Religion is Greatest Story Ever Missed" USA Today (March 16, 1990), 13A.


<!-- page-12 (book p.467) -->

1 Paul C. Vitz, Censorship: Evidence of Bias in Our Children's Textbooks (Ann Arbor, MI: Servant Books, 1986), 1.
Emphasis added.
18 Vitz, Censorship, 3.
"' As reported in Carey Quan Gelernter, "The Real Thanksgiving," Seattle Post-Intelligencer (November 23, 1986), LI.
2ºAs reported in Gelernter, "The Real Thanksgiving," L2.
21 Squanto and the First Thanksgiving, Rabbit Ears, Atlanta Journal/Constitution (November 27, 1994).
William Bradford, Bradford's History of the Plymouth Settlement: 1608-1650, original manuscript entitled Of Plymouth
Plantation rendered into modern English by Harold Paget (Portland, OR: American Heritage Ministries, [1909) 1988).
" Edward Winslow, How the Pilgrim Fathers Lived, 2:116. Emphasis added. CD Sourcebook of American History
(Mesa, AR: Candlelight Publishing, 1992). Also see Mourt's Relation: A Journal of the Pilgrims of Plymouth, ed.
Jordan D. Fiore (Plymouth, MA: Plymouth Rock Foundation, [1622) 1985), 67-69.
2 Diana Karter Appelbaum, Thanksgiving: An American Holiday, An American History (New York: Facts on File
Publications, 1984), 9.
25 This editing was exposed in Education Update, Heritage Foundation, 10:3 (Summer 1987). Quoted in Robert P.
Dugan, Winning the New Civil War: Recapturing America's Values (Portland, OR: Multnomah Press, 1991), 149-50.
2 Kendall Hamilton, "No Red Faces, They Hope," Newsweek (November 21, 1994), 61.
2 Whitehead, The Rights of Religious Persons in Public Education, 41-42.
2 Henry Steele Commager, "Preface," McGuffey's Fifth Eclectic Reader. Quoted in Whitehead, The Rights of Religious
Persons in Public Education, 42.
2 John H. Westerhoff, III, "The Struggle for a Common Culture: Biblical Images in Nineteenth-Century School-
books," The Bible in American Education, eds. David L. Barr and Nicholas Piediscalzi (Philadelphia, PA: Fortress
Press, 1982), 32.
30 Westerhoff, "The Struggle for a Common Culture: Biblical Images in Nineteenth-Century Schoolbooks," 28.
3 Charles B. Galloway, Christianity and the American Commonwealth; or, The Influence of Christianity in Making
This Nation (Nashville, TN: Methodist Episcopal Church, 1898), 15.
32 O. L. Davis, Jr., et al., Looking at History: A Review of Major U.S. History Textbooks (1986), 3. Quoted in Joan Delfat-
tore, What Johnny Shouldn't Read: Textbook Censorship in America (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1992), 85.
33 This is also the conclusion of the editorial writers of the Marietta Daily Journal: "History needing revision"
(October 30, 1994), 2D. The National Standards for United States History has called for the restoration of the role
religion played in the founding of America while pushing a "politically correct" agenda in nearly everything else.
See Lynne V. Cheney, "The End of History," Wall Street Journal (October 20, 1994), A24.
3* Warren A. Nord, "Taking Religion Seriously" Social Education, 54:9 (September 1990), 287. Quoted in History
Textbooks: A Standard and Guide, 1994-95 Edition (New York: American Textbook Council, 1994), 32.
35 History Textbooks: A Standard and Guide, 1994-95 Edition, 32.
% History Textbooks: A Standard and Guide, 1994-95 Edition, 33.
"CENSORING THE PAST" DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. What is censorship and when it is appropriate?
In the legal sense, censorship is a mandate by the government prohibiting the publication,
sale, or distribution of material it deems to be politically harmful. In a broader sense,
censorship is when a group in authority, such as a school board or library, bans certain
materials it finds objectionable.
Censorship can be appropriate when it protects citizens from harmful material such
as pornography or hate speech. However, everyone has different opinions as to what is
harmful. It can also be appropriate in certain places, like a school library, but may not
apply in the same way to a retail bookstore or private home.
2. What kinds of books are usually singled out for banning?
Everything from Mark Twain to James Dobson, it turns out. Libraries and schools can
try to ban material that isn't "politically correct" by their standards when it comes to
religion, occultism, sexism, racism, gender issues, and so on. On the flip side, they can
also choose to keep objectionable materials on their shelves in the name of free expres-
sion and supposedly artistic or social value, for instance, Playboy.
A book doesn't have to be universally despised or have a groundswell of protest to be
banned. Sometimes only a handful of complaints or the opposition of a strategic orga-
nization is sufficient to get it censured.
3. What are some areas in which an anti-Christian bias is apparent in censorship and
selective editing?
News coverage of world events is often slanted to exclude the religious side of stories
except when it's negative, such as terrorists and extremists. And explicitly Christian
themes or religiously motivated actions are regularly excluded from news articles.
Public school textbooks are edited to remove Christian content and influence. One
study by the National Institute on Education found "In grades 1 through 4 these books
introduce the child to U.S. society—to family life, community activities, ordinary eco-
nomic transactions, and some history. None of the books covering grades 1 through 4
contain one word referring to any religious activity in contemporary American life.
4. Censorship isn't just a current problem; it reaches into the past. Can you cite examples
of how our history is being rewritten to minimize or exclude the role of Christianity?
Historical events such as the Mayflower Compact and the first Thanksgiving are stripped
of their spiritual aspects in many history books. The influence of Christianity on Native
Americans like Squanto and Pocahontas is ignored as is the missionary zeal that moti-
vated many of the first settlers.


<!-- page-13 (book p.409) -->

"CENSORING THE PAST" DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
In 1898 Bishop Charles Galloway noted, "Books on the making of our nation have been
written, and are the texts in our colleges, in which the Christian religion, as a social
and civil factor, has only scant or apologetic mention. This is either a fatal oversight or
a deliberate purpose, and both alike to be deplored and condemned. A nation ashamed
of its ancestry will be despised by its posterity.?"
5. Should religion have a place in public school textbooks?
The United States Constitution guarantees religious freedom and prohibits the govern-
ment from establishing a state religion. But that doesn't mean the religious aspects of
our history have to be ignored. History is a record of what happened and shouldn't be
edited to serve current political agendas.
Nor should the role of faith in everyday life be excluded from civics or social studies,
because, as Warren A. Nord insists:
What cannot be doubted is that our ways of thinking about nature, morality, art,
and society were once (and for many people still are) fundamentally religious, and
still today in our highly secular world it is difficult even for the non-religious to
extricate themselves entirely from the webs of influence and meaning provided by
our religious past. ... To understand history and (historical) literature one must
understand a great deal about religion: on this all agree.
"RESTORING ALL THINGS" VIDEO
Warren Smith of The Colson Center expounds on the message of his book, Restoring
All Things: The world is changed by ordinary people because God uses the least and the
most broken to do his greatest work. To become a restorer requires four things:
1. We must become known by what we are for, not what we are against.
2. We must recover the art of storytelling.
3. We must learn to tell the complete biblical story.
4. We must be reconcilers by relearning how to care for the victims of anti-Christian
ideologies.
Smith suggests the kind of questions Christians must ask and answer to restore God's
story in a broken world:
• What is missing that we can creatively contribute?
• What is evil in our culture that we can stop?
To access this video, go to www.summitu.com/utt and enter the passcode found in the back
of your manual.


<!-- page-14 -->

"RESTORING ALL THINGS" VIDEO OUTLINE
The world is changed by ordinary people. God uses the least, the lost, and the broken to do
his greatest work. God loves "re-" words: redeem, renew, resurrect, reconcile, regenerate,
restore. There are four key points to becoming restorers:
We must become known by what we are _
against
(Philippians 4:8).
for
, not what we are
Christians should devote themselves to the good, the true, and the beautiful. This
can happen in the arts but also in any vocation done well for the glory of God.
2. We must recover the art of storytelling.
There is real power in storytelling. Stories help us remember abstract ideas. They do
this by providing relevance and context. We need to recover the art of biblical story-
telling. Biblical storytelling illuminates the meta-narrative of God's work in the world.
It is telling the truth about the world and God's redeeming and restoring work in it.
3. We must learn to tell the complete biblical story.
We often forget to add the fourth truth to the biblical story: Creation, Fall, Redemp-
tion and
Restoration
_ The gospel is not just the story of what we are
saved from; it's also the story of what we are saved for. We have been reconciled to
be reconcilers.
4. We must be reconcilers by caring for the victims of anti-Christian ideologies.
Examples of bad ideas that have resulted in the deaths of millions:
Marxism
• Sexual revolution
• Radical Islam
• Faux Christianity that inoculates many to the true gospel message
How can we restore God's story? By asking and answering these questions:
• What is _
missing
_ that we can creatively contribute?
• What is evil in our culture that we can stop 2
"RESTORING ALL THINGS" DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
Can you identify some issues Christians are known to be "against" and suggest what
we could be known "for" in these areas instead?
Against:
For:
Abortion
Adoption, foster care, post-abortion care
Homosexuality
Wholesome sexuality
Socialism/Social gospel
Care of the poor, social justice, racial equality
Liberal education
Advancing human knowledge; all truth is God's truth
See how many of these the students come up with and what other issues they identify.
Have them expand on the positive things Christians can do in these areas while still af-
firming a biblical worldview.
2. What makes storytelling so powerful and why is it important in a postmodern world?
The real power in storytelling is its ability to help people remember and be moved by
abstract ideas. Stories do this by providing relevance and context. The power of stories is
not that they win arguments now, but that they win people's hearts and minds over time.
Biblical storytelling is especially important in a postmodern culture where storytelling
is subjective, disjointed and isolated. Biblical storytelling, on the other hand, tells the
truth of God's work in the world. As Robert Webber pointed out, "The most pressing
spiritual issue of our time: Who gets to narrate the world?"
Jesus was a master storyteller (Mark 4:34). He used parables to drive his points home
in unforgettable ways. Many non-Christians and people who have never read the Bible
know his stories of the prodigal son, the good Samaritan, and others. More important,
they know the meaning of these stories in ways that impact their own behavior.
What part do Christians tend to leave out of the biblical story?
The biblical story is often told under three headings:
Creation: The universe is not an accident. God made everything with a specific purpose
in mind.
Fall: Humans chose to ignore God's design and go their own way. This sin opened the
door to suffering and death.
Redemption: The gospel is the good news that God sent his Son to redeem humanity.
But the story doesn't stop there. Redemption has a purpose, which is the fourth part of
the biblical story...
Restoration: The gospel is not just the story of what we are saved from; it is also the story
of what we are saved for. We have been reconciled to be reconcilers.


<!-- page-15 (book p.473) -->

"RESTORING ALL THINGS" DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
4. What are some bad ideologies whose victims need care and restoration?
Some worldviews based on bad ideologies have become prominent during the last century,
and their fruit can be judged by all. Such ideologies include the following:
Marxism: Socialist and Communist governments based on Marxism haven't freed the
oppressed and elevated the working class. Just the opposite. Such governments have been
responsible for the deaths of more than one hundred million of their citizens.
Sexual revolution: Free love hasn't resulted in deeper relationships, stable families and
marriages or healthy sexuality. Instead, it has led to exponential increases in sexually
transmitted diseases and elective abortions, resulting in the deaths of millions. Pornog-
raphy and abnormal sexual practices have ruined millions of lives.
Radical Islam: While some Muslims claim Islam is a religion of peace, others have em-
braced the Quran's teachings about jihad and taken up the sword against nonbelievers
and Muslims who break shariah Law.
Christians must reach out to the victims of these ideologies and help them to be rec-
onciled to a loving God. Christians must be able to articulate a biblical worldview that
makes more sense and leads to a life with more purpose and meaning.
5. What does it mean that Christians should "run toward the plague?"
The Plague of Cyprian (250-270 AD) took place during a time of Christian persecution.
Christians were even blamed for the plague. Christian leaders didn't abandon the cities
like everyone else but stayed and helped the victims. Many died as a result, but their
agape love won large numbers of converts and eventually helped make Christianity the
official religion of the Roman Empire.
Are Christians today running toward the plague and working to bring healing and
restoration?
• What is missing that we can creatively contribute?
• What is evil in our culture that we can stop?
Chapter 17 Key Points
Key Questions:
1. What is history?
2. How do the six dominant Western
worldviews approach history?
Key Terms:
1. Bourgeoisie
2. Capitalism
3. Communism
4. Cosmic Evolution
5. Cyclical Conception of History
6. Redemptive Narrative
7. Deconstruction
8. Determinism
9. Evolutionary Godhood*
10. Fact
11. Free Will
12. Historical Materialism*
13. Historical Revisionism*
14. Historicism
15. Historiography
16. History*
17. Islamist
18. Jihad
19. Linear Conception of History
20. Nihilism
21. Pan-Islam*
22. Proletariat
23. Redemptive Narrative*
24. Social Progress*
25. Socialism
Key Verses:
1. Acts 17:31
2. 1 Corinthians 15:14
3. Galatians 4:4
4.2 Peter 3:13
Key Players:
1. Caesar E. Farah
2. Michael Foucault
3. G. W. F. Hegel
4. Herodotus
5. John Lukacs
6. Karl Popper
7. Thucydides
8. Howard Zinn
Key Works:
1. A People's History of the United States
by Howard Zinn
2. The Histories by Herodotus
3. History of the Peloponnesian War by
Thucydides
4. Metahistory by Hayden White
5. Power/Knowledge by Michael
Foucault


<!-- page-16 -->

CHAPTER 17 ASSIGNMENT
Greetings!
Your last letter helped me out a ton when writing my economics paper. Thanks a lot! Now I just
have to focus on surviving these last few weeks of the semester. Elections are held next week, and finals
are held the following three weeks. Surprisingly, this week will be relatively low key, like the calm before
the storm. My professors have been helpful with supplying extra office hours in preparation for finals. In
fact I met with my History of Western Civilization professor yesterday to talk about some questions I had
concerning next week's studies on the French Revolution. He is an interesting old man with a British
accent and a penchant for wearing tweed coats and bow ties.
During our conversation, I mentioned how his class has me considering perhaps majoring or
minoring in history. He described what it was like to be a historian, digging in archives and spending
long hours poring over forgotten texts. He also related his favorite travel memories while researching
his latest book. Apparently historians travel the world and learn many languages. An overwhelming
topic of our conversation was the method of viewing and analyzing history. Essentially, he was
explaining how historians view the overarching theme of history. He views history through the lens of
progression. He related it to evolutionary theory. History is always changing, or progressing, as human
beings evolve. When I asked him what the end goal of the progression was, he merely chuckled and
replied, "progress." Evolution has no purpose, only direction.
The professor's view of history doesn't seem to align with what Christianity says about human
depravity and God's redemptive plan for humanity. I told the professor I believed history had meaning
and purpose to it. He challenged to me prove it. I told him I was a Christian, but he didn't seem to
accept that as an answer. He gave me several books to read on the topic by authors he described as
leading humanist and Marxist scholars of history. I assume he means Secular Humanists. I want to be
able to speak with him further on these topics, but I need your help understanding the subject better.
What is the Secularist view of history? Also, what is the Marxist view of history? He has
mentioned in class before that some historians promote the idea that history is only the interpretations
we impart onto the subject. This sounds like something Paige, as a Postmodernist, would say. How
does Postmodernism approach the discipline of history? Nathan is taking this class with me,
so I want to be prepared to talk with him too. How does New Spirituality view history? I also wonder
how similar Islam is to Christianity with regards to history. How do Islamic and Christian views of
history differ?
Thanks again for all your help. I appreciate how much time you spend aiding my understanding of
all these different topics. You rock!
See ya!
-Doug
HS TORY
- 4-75-
- 44. -
