# Chapter 1

<!-- page-1 -->

UNIT
CHAPTER 1 LEARNING OBJECTIVES
Students will be able to:
articulate why they need guidance in life. [1.1-1.2]
2. identify how ideas affect the way they live. [1.3]
3. explain the five key questions that affect their direction in life. [1.4]
4. describe why it is important to understand the times in which they live. [1.5]
5. discuss why the search for knowledge is possible. [1.6]
state why the search for knowledge is biblical and important. [17]
7. list different types of authority and state the relevance of each to their lives. [1.8]
8. present evidence for why Christians should submit to God's authority. [1.9-1.10]
9. articulate why biblical faith isn't blind or without reason. [1.11]
10. discuss how to deal with doubt. [1.11]
11. explain why this book is important. [1.12-1.14]
12. summarize why they should live out their faith in the location God has placed


<!-- page-2 -->

CHAPTER 1
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
Why was this book written? [1.2]
5. What are five important questions with which every human must grapple? [1.4]
What is the result of the human search for answers? [1.2]
6. How do the answers to some of the questions above shape the answer to others?
3. How do ideas influence the direction of our lives? [1.3]
7. What can we learn from the ancient tribe of Issachar about living a good life? [1.5]
4. Is there a principle we can use to make sense of the vast array of ideas? [1.4]
8. What is "epistemology" and why is it important? [1.6]
UNIT 1


<!-- page-3 -->

9. What problem does relativism create for secular humanists? [1.6]
10. Should Christians study worldviews and philosophies that are at odds with
Christianity? [1.7]
11. What is the "two-story concept of truth" and why is it dangerous? [1.8]
12. What problems are created by the "fact/value split?" [1.8]
UNITS
13. What does it mean to have authority? [1.9]
14. What types of authority does God have? [1.9]
15. Is doubt a good reason for not submitting to God's authority? [1.10]
16. What is biblical faith? [1.11]


<!-- page-4 -->

17. Can a person have faith and doubts at the same time? [1.11]
21. What reasons can give to show that the Bible is the Word of God?
18. What are the areas where you might be embarrassed if someone were to challenge
your faith? [1.13]
19. Are today's Christian young adults prepared to defend their faith in a pluralistic
world? [114]
20. What is the main battle of our time? [1.15]
=h.


<!-- page-5 -->

"DOES GOD EXIST?" READING
Christian philosopher William Lane Craig explains why the idea that God is dead is itself
dead in many academic circles. Along with a resurgence of traditional philosophical argu-
ments for God-cosmological, teleological, moral, and ontological-new arguments have
been presented and defended by top-tier Christian philosophers.
Craig briefly outlines eight reasons in support of God's existence:
1. God is the best explanation why anything at all exists.
2. God is the best explanation of the origin of the universe.
3. God is the best explanation of the applicability of mathematics to the physical world.
God is the best explanation of the fine-tuning of the universe for intelligent life.
God is the best explanation of intentional states of consciousness.
God is the best explanation of objective moral values and duties.
The very possibility of God's existence implies that God exists.
God can be personally known and experienced.
Together these arguments make a strong case for a personal God as the best explanation for
universe in which we find ourselves.
DOES GOD EXIST?
by William Lane Craig
On April 8, 1966, Time magazine carried a lead story for which the cover was com-
pletely black except for three words emblazoned in bright, red letters against the dark
background: "IS GOD DEAD?" The story described the so-called "Death of God"
movement then current in American theology. But, to paraphrase Mark Twain, it
seemed that the news of God's demise was "greatly exaggerated." For at the same
time that theologians were writing God's obituary, a new generation of young phi-
losophers was re-discovering His vitality.
Back in the 1940s and '50s it was widely believed among philosophers that any talk
about God is meaningless, since it is not verifiable by the five senses. The collapse
of this Verificationism was perhaps the most important philosophical event of the
twentieth century. Its downfall meant a resurgence of metaphysics, along with other
traditional problems of philosophy which Verificationism had suppressed. Accom-
panying this resurgence came something altogether unanticipated: a renaissance of
Christian philosophy.
The turning point probably came in 1967 with the publication of Alvin Plantinga's
God and Other Minds, which applied the tools of analytic philosophy to questions in
the philosophy of religion with an unprecedented rigor and creativity. In Plantinga's
train has followed a host of Christian philosophers, writing in professional journals
and participating in professional conferences and publishing with the finest academic
presses. The face of Anglo-American philosophy has been transformed as a result.
Atheism, although perhaps still the dominant viewpoint in Western universities, is
a philosophy in retreat. In a recent article, University of Western Michigan philoso-
pher Quentin Smith laments what he calls "the desecularization of academia that
evolved in philosophy departments since the late 1960s." ("The Metaphilosophy of
Naturalism, Philo, Vol 4, #2, at philoonline.org). Complaining of naturalists' passivity
in the face of the wave of " intelligent and talented theists entering academia today,
Smith concludes, "God is not 'dead' in academia; he returned to life in the late 1960s
and is now alive and well in his last academic stronghold, philosophy departments."
The renaissance of Christian philosophy has been accompanied by a resurgence of
interest in natural theology-that branch of theology which seeks to prove God's
existence without appeal to the resources of authoritative divine revelation-for
instance, through philosophical argument. All of the traditional philosophical ar-
guments for God's existence, such as the cosmological, teleological, moral, and
ontological arguments, not to mention creative, new arguments, find intelligent and
articulate defenders on the contemporary philosophical scene.
But what about the so-called "New Atheism" exemplified by Richard Dawkins, Sam
Harris, and Christopher Hitchens? Doesn't it herald a reversal of this trend? Not really.
As is evident from the authors it interacts with—or rather, doesn't interact with-the
New Atheism is, in fact, a pop-cultural phenomenon lacking in intellectual muscle
and blissfully ignorant of the revolution that has taken place in Anglo-American
philosophy. It tends to reflect the scientism of a bygone generation, rather than the
contemporary intellectual scene.
Eight Reasons in Support of God's Existence
I believe that God's existence best explains a wide range of the data of human experi-
ence. Let me briefly mention eight such cases.
(I) God is the best explanation why anything at all exists.
Suppose you were hiking through the forest and came upon a ball lying on the
ground. You would naturally wonder how it came to be there. If your hiking buddy
said to you, "Forget about it! It just exists!" you would think he was either joking or
just wanted you to keep moving. No one would take seriously the idea that the ball
just exists without any explanation. Now notice than merely increasing the size of the
ball until it becomes coextensive with the universe does nothing to either provide,
or remove the need for, an explanation of its existence.
So what is the explanation of the existence of the universe (by "the universe" I mean
all of spacetime reality)? The explanation of the universe can lie only in a transcendent
reality beyond it—beyond space and time— the existence of which transcendent real-
ity is metaphysically necessary (otherwise its existence would also need explaining).
Now there is only one way I can think of to get a contingent entity like the universe


<!-- page-6 -->

from a necessarily existing cause, and that is if the cause is an agent who can freely
choose to create the contingent reality. It therefore follows that the best explanation
of the existence of the contingent universe is a transcendent personal being-which
is what everybody means by "God"
We can summarize this reasoning as follows:
1. Every contingent thing has an explanation of its existence.
2. If the universe has an explanation of its existence, that explanation is a transcen-
dent, personal being.
3. The universe is a contingent thing.
4. Therefore, the universe has an explanation of its existence.
5. Therefore, the explanation of the universe is a transcendent, personal being-
which is what everybody means by "God"
(II) God is the best explanation of the origin of the universe.
We have pretty strong evidence that the universe has not existed eternally into the
past, but had a beginning a finite time ago. In 2003, the mathematician Arvind Borde,
and physicists Alan Guth and Alexander Vilenkin were able to prove that any universe
which has, on average, been expanding throughout its history cannot be infinite in
the past, but must have a past spacetime boundary (i.e., a beginning). What makes
their proof so powerful is that it holds so long as time and causality hold, regardless
of the physical description of the very early universe. Because we don't yet have a
quantum theory of gravity, we can't yet provide a physical description of the first
split-second of the universe; but the Borde-Guth-Vilenkin theorem is independent
of one's theory of gravitation. For instance, their theorem implies that the quantum
vacuum state which may have characterized the early universe cannot have existed
eternally into the past, but must itself have had a beginning. Even if our universe
is just a tiny part of a so-called "multiverse," composed of many universes, their
theorem requires that the multiverse itself must have had a beginning.
Of course, highly speculative physical scenarios, such as loop quantum gravity mod-
els, string models, even closed timelike curves, have been proposed to try to avoid
this absolute beginning. These models are fraught with problems, but the bottom
line is that none of these theories, even if true, succeeds in restoring an eternal past
for the universe. Last year, at a conference in Cambridge celebrating the seventieth
birthday of Stephen Hawking, Vilenkin delivered a paper entitled "Did the Universe
Have a Beginning?" which surveyed current cosmology with respect to that question.
He argued that "none of these scenarios can actually be past-eternal" Specifically,
Vilenkin closed the door on three models attempting to avert the implication of his
theorem: eternal inflation, a cyclic universe, and an "emergent" universe which exists
for eternity as a static seed before expanding. Vilenkin concluded, "All the evidence
We have says that the universe had a beginning."
But then the inevitable question arises: Why did the universe come into being? What
brought the universe into existence? There must have been a transcendent cause
which brought the universe into being—a cause outside the universe itself.
We can summarize this argument thus far as follows:
1. The universe began to exist.
2. If the universe began to exist, then the universe has a transcendent cause.
3. Therefore, the universe has a transcendent cause.
By the very nature of the case, that cause of the physical universe must be an im-
material (i.e., non-physical) being. Now there are only two types of things that could
possibly fit that description: either an abstract object like a number, or an unembodied
mind/consciousness. But abstract objects don't stand in causal relations to physical
things. The number 7, for example, has no effect on anything. Therefore, the cause
of the universe is an unembodied mind. Thus again we are brought, not merely to a
transcendent cause of the universe, but to its Personal Creator.
(III) God is the best explanation of the applicability of mathematics to the physi-
cal world.
Philosophers and scientists have puzzled over what physicist Eugene Wigner called
"the unreasonable effectiveness of mathematics." How is it that a mathematical theorist
like Peter Higgs can sit down at his desk and, by pouring over mathematical equations,
predict the existence of a fundamental particle which, thirty years later, after invest-
ing millions of dollars and thousands of man-hours, experimentalists are finally able
to detect? Mathematics is the language of nature. But how is this to be explained? If
mathematical objects like numbers and mathematical theorems are abstract entities
causally isolated from the physical universe, then the applicability of mathematics is,
in the words of philosopher of mathematics Mary Leng, "a happy coincidence." On
the other hand, if mathematical objects are just useful fictions, how is it that nature
is written in the language of these fictions? The naturalist has no explanation for the
uncanny applicability of mathematics to the physical world. By contrast, the theist
has a ready explanation: When God created the physical universe He designed it in
terms of the mathematical structure which He had in mind.
We can summarize this argument as follows:
1. If God did not exist, the applicability of mathematics would be just a happy
coincidence.
2. The applicability of mathematics is not just a happy coincidence.
(IV) God is the best explanation of the fine-tuning of the universe for intelligent
life.
In recent decades scientists have been stunned by the discovery that the initial con-
ditions of the Big Bang were fine-tuned for the existence of intelligent life with a
precision and delicacy that literally defy human comprehension. This fine-tuning
is of two sorts. First, when the laws of nature are expressed as equations, you find
appearing in them certain constants, such as the gravitational constant. The values
of these constants are independent of the laws of nature. Second, in addition to these
constants, there are certain arbitrary quantities which define the initial conditions on


<!-- page-7 -->

which the laws of nature operate-for example, the amount of entropy (disorder) in
the universe. Now these constants and quantities fall into an extraordinarily narrow
range of life-permitting values. Were these constants or quantities to be altered by
less than a hair's breadth, the life-permitting balance of nature would be destroyed,
and life would not exist.
There are three live explanatory options for this extraordinary fine-tuning: physical
necessity, chance, or design.
Physical necessity is not, however, a plausible explanation, because the finely-tuned
constants and quantities are independent of the laws of nature. Therefore, they are
not physically necessary.
So could this fine-tuning be due to chance? The problem with this explanation is
that the odds of all the constants and quantities randomly falling into the incompre-
hensibly narrow life-permitting range are just so infinitesimal that they cannot be
reasonably accepted. Therefore, the proponents of the chance explanation have been
forced to postulate the existence of a 'World Ensemble of other universes, preferably
infinite in number and randomly ordered, so that life-permitting universes like ours
would appear by chance somewhere in the Ensemble. Not only is this hypothesis,
to borrow Richard Dawkins' phrase, "an unparsimonious extravagance," it faces an
insuperable objection. By far, the most probable observable universes in a World
Ensemble would be worlds in which a single brain fluctuated into existence out of
the vacuum and observed its otherwise empty world. So, if our world were just a
random member of the World Ensemble, by all probability we ought to be having
observations like that. Since we don't, that strongly disconfirms the World Ensemble
hypothesis. So chance is also not a good explanation. Thus,
1. The fine-tuning of the universe is due to either physical necessity, chance,
or design.
2. The fine-tuning of the universe is not due to physical necessity or chance.
3. Therefore, the fine-tuning of the universe is due to design.
4. Thus, the fine-tuning of the universe constitutes evidence for a cosmic
Designer.
(V) God is the best explanation of intentional states of consciousness.
Philosophers are puzzled by states of intentionality. Intentionality is the property
of being about something or of something. It signifies the object-directedness of our
thoughts. For example, I can think about my summer vacation, or I can think of
my wife. No physical object has intentionality in this sense. A chair or a stone or
a glob of tissue like the brain is not about or of something else. Only mental states
or states of consciousness are about other things. In The Atheist's Guide to Reality:
Enjoying Life without Illusions (2011), the materialist Alex Rosenberg recognizes this
fact, and concludes that for atheists, there really are no intentional states. Rosenberg
boldly claims that we never really think about anything. But this seems incredible.
Obviously, I am thinking about Rosenberg's argument—and so are you! This seems
to me to be a reductio ad absurdum of his atheism. By contrast, for theists, because
God is a mind, it's hardly surprising that there should be other, finite minds, with
intentional states. Thus intentional states fit comfortably into a theistic worldview.
So we may argue:
1. If God did not exist, intentional states of consciousness would not exist.
But intentional states of consciousness do exist.
(VI) God is the best explanation of objective moral values and duties.
In our experience we apprehend moral values and duties which impose themselves
as objectively binding and true. For example, we recognize that it's wrong to walk
into an elementary school with an automatic weapon and shoot little boys and girls
and their teachers. On a naturalistic view, however, there is nothing really wrong
with this: moral values are just the subjective by-products of biological evolution and
social conditioning, and have no objective validity.
Alex Rosenberg is brutally honest about the implications of his atheism here too. He
declares, "there is no such thing as ... morally right or wrong" (The Atheist's Guide
to Reality, p. 145); "Individual human life is meaningless ... and without ultimate
moral value." (p. 17); "We need to face the fact that nihilism is true." (p. 95). By
contrast, the theist grounds objective moral values in God, and our moral duties in
His commands. The theist thus has the explanatory resources to ground objective
moral values and duties which the atheist lacks.
Hence we may argue:
1. Objective moral values and duties exist.
2. But if God did not exist, objective moral values and duties would not exist.
(VII) The very possibility of God's existence implies that God exists.
In order to understand this argument, you need to understand what philosophers
mean by "possible worlds" A possible world is just a way the world might have
been. It is a description of a possible reality. So a possible world is not a planet or a
universe or any kind of concrete object, it is a world-description. The actual world
is the description that is true. Other possible worlds are descriptions that are not
in fact true but which might have been true. To say that something exists in some
possible world is to say that there is some consistent description of reality which
includes that entity. To say that something exists in every possible world means that
no matter which description is true, that entity will be included in the description.
For example, unicorns do not in fact exist, but there are some possible worlds in
which unicorns exist. On the other hand, many mathematicians think that numbers
exist in every possible world.
Now with that in mind, consider the ontological argument, which was discovered
in the year 1011 by the monk Anselm of Canterbury. God, Anselm observes, is by
definition the greatest being conceivable. If you could conceive of anything greater


<!-- page-8 -->

than God, then that would be God. Thus, God is the greatest conceivable being—a
maximally great being. So what would such a being be like? He would be all-powerful,
all-knowing, and all-good, and He would exist in every logically possible world. A
being which lacked any of those properties would not be maximally great: we could
conceive of something greater—a being which did have all these properties.
But this implies that if God's existence is even possible, then God must exist. For if
a maximally great being exists in any possible world, He exists in all of them. That's
part of what it means to be maximally great—to be all-powerful, all-knowing, and
all-good in every logically possible world. So if God's existence is even possible,
then He exists in every logically possible world—and therefore in the actual world.
We can summarize this argument as follows:
1. It is possible that a maximally great being (God) exists.
2. If it is possible that a maximally great being exists, then a maximally great
being exists in some possible world.
3. If a maximally great being exists in some possible world, then it exists in
every possible world.
4. If a maximally great being exists in every possible world, then it exists in the
actual world.
5. Therefore, a maximally great being exists in the actual world.
6. Therefore, a maximally great being exists.
7. Therefore, God exists.
It might surprise you to learn that steps 2-7 of this argument are relatively uncon-
troversial. Most philosophers would agree that if God's existence is even possible,
then He must exist.
So the question is, is God's existence possible? Well, what do you think? The atheist
has to maintain that it's impossible that God exists. That is, he has to maintain that
the concept of God is logically incoherent, like the concept of a married bachelor or
a round square. The problem is that the concept of God just doesn't appear to be
incoherent in that way. The idea of a being who is all-powerful, all-knowing, and
all-good in every possible world seems perfectly coherent. Moreover, as we've seen,
there are other arguments for God's existence which at least suggest that it's possible
that God exists. So TIl just leave it with you. Do you think, as I do, that it's at least
possible that God exists? If so, then it follows logically that He does exist.
(VIII) God can be personally known and experienced.
This isn't really an argument for God's existence; rather it's the claim that you can
know God exists wholly apart from arguments, by personally experiencing him.
Philosophers call beliefs grasped in this way "properly basic beliefs" They aren't
based on some other beliefs; rather they're part of the foundation of a person's system
of beliefs. Other properly basic beliefs would be the belief in the reality of the past
or the existence of the external world. When you think about it, neither of these
beliefs can be proved by argument. How could you prove that the world was not
created five minutes ago with built-in appearances of age like food in our stomachs
from the breakfasts we never really ate and memory traces in our brains of events
we never really experienced? How could you prove that you are not a brain in a vat
of chemicals being stimulated with electrodes by some mad scientist to believe that
• you are reading this article? We don't base such beliefs on argument; rather they re
part of the foundations of our system of beliefs.
But although these sorts of beliefs are basic for us, that doesn't mean that they're
arbitrary. Rather they're grounded in the sense that they're formed in the context
of certain experiences. In the experiential context of seeing and feeling and hear-
ing things, I naturally form the belief that there are certain physical objects which I
am sensing. Thus, my basic beliefs are not arbitrary, but appropriately grounded in
experience. There may be no way to prove such beliefs, and yet it's perfectly rational
to hold them. Such beliefs are thus not merely basic, but properly basic. In the same
way, belief in God is for those who seek Him a properly basic belief grounded in
their experience of God.
Now if this is so, then theres a danger that philosophical arguments for God could
actually distract your attention from God Himself. The Bible promises, "Draw near
to God and he will draw near to you" (James 4:8). We mustn't so concentrate on the
external arguments that we fail to hear the inner voice of God speaking to our hearts.
For those who listen, God becomes a personal reality in their lives.
Summary
In summary, we've seen eight respects in which God provides a better account of
the world than naturalism: God is the best explanation of
(I) Why anything at all exists.
(II) The origin of the universe.
(III) The applicability of mathematics to the physical world.
(IV) The fine-tuning of the universe for intelligent life.
(V) Intentional states of consciousness.
(VI) Objective moral values and duties.
Moreover
(VII) The very possibility of God's existence implies that God exists.
(VIII) God can be personally experienced and known.
This essay originally appeared on the website https://philosophynow.org/issues/99/Does_God_Exist. It is reproduced
here with the permission of the publisher and author.


<!-- page-9 -->

"DOES GOD EXIST?" DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. What factors led to a resurgence of Christian philosophy in the twentieth century?
2. How does the fine-tuning of the universe provide evidence for a cosmic Designer?
3. Why is God the best explanation of objective moral values and duties?
"DoEs GOD ExIsT?" DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
4. What is the ontological argument and how does it explain God's existence?
5. How do we know that God can be personally known and experienced?


<!-- page-10 -->

"WHY APOLOGETICS?" VIDEO
Mary Jo Sharp opens with her own story of conversion from atheism to Christianity.
She talks about her early struggles with doubt and her efforts to believe in the truth of
the Bible. Her search for answers led her into the field of apologetics.
Apologetics is "a defense" for the Christian faith. Apologetics involves knowing what you
believe, why you believe it, and how to defend it. Sharp gives three reasons for studying
apologetics: (1) to answer doubts, (2) to build confidence, and (3) to change lives. She
goes on to explain several ways to do these vital tasks effectively.
To access this video, go to www.summitu.com/utf and enter the passcode found in the back
of your manual.
"WHY APOLOGETICS?" VIDEO OUTLINE
Former atheist Mary Jo Sharp rejected Christianity because of many factors:
• Upbringing
• Entertainment and news media
• Shallow and hypocritical Christians
• Distrust of the church
Being exposed to a vibrant Christian and the Bible led to her conversion and ultimately
an interest in apologetics. Apologetics: giving a "defense" (1 Peter 3:15). Apologetics
involves defense and offense:
• Defense-answering
• Offense-presenting
to the faith
for belief
Three Reasons for Apologetics
1. Answer Doubts
Doubts are prevalent because of
• life experiences;
• brushes with great
• exposure to bad arguments without exposure to good arguments;
• limitation of human knowledge; and
• lack of living in God's presence.
Seeking answers to doubts can root out false beliefs and allow us to trust God.
Sometimes we won't find answers to doubts; we just have to live with them.
2. Build Confidence
These things tear down confidence in God:
• Popular atheists who insist Christianity isn't intellectually credible
• Media and education that present a secularized view of the world
• Christians who lack
- who don't know how to integrate
faith and life, and who reject the need to engage the culture
3. Change Lives
Apologetics can change lives. It transforms us and the people around us.
Personal transformation is proof of God. It's not that people don't have answers
to their questions, it's that they don't have good models.
We can't change the
unless we are changed first.


<!-- page-11 -->

"WHY APOLOGETICS?" DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
What are some of the factors keeping people like Mary Jo Sharp from becoming
Christians?
2. What is apologetics, and what does it try to achieve?
3. How did Jesus respond to the doubts of the apostle Thomas and John the Baptist?
UNITI
"WHY APOLOGETICS?" DISCUSSION OUESTIONS
4. Why are doubts so prevalent?
5. What's tearing down confidence in Christianity in our culture?


<!-- page-12 -->

Chapter 1 Key Points
Key Questions:
1. Why are ideas
important?
2. How do ideas
affect us?
3. How do faith and
ideas relate?
Key Terms:
1. Epistemology
2. Faith
3. Hard Authority
4. Relativism
5. Soft Authority*
Key Verses:
1. 1 Chronicles 12:32
2. Esther 4:14
3. Romans 1:18-21
4. Romans 12:2
5. 2 Corinthians 10:5
6. Ephesians 4:17-24
7. Colossians 2:8
CHAPTER 1 ASSIGNMENT
Answer the following questions with at least one paragraph.
1. Explain the concept of a mental map and how it can help us to understand and explain
the world. Who has this kind of "ideas map," what kinds of questions should it help us
answer, and why do our answers matter?
2. What are some reasons Christians give to avoid thinking about "worldly" kinds of
knowledge and philosophy, and how might a Christian answer these objections biblically?
*Short answer or essay question on the exam
3. What is the metaphor of the "two-story concept of truth," and what are some conse-
quences of thinking that way?
4. How might a Christian respond to the claim that Christianity is based on faith, and
that faith is the opposite of knowledge or facts?
Other potential questions:
• What kinds of authority have most influenced your own understanding of Christianity, whether for
good or bad?
•What are some doubts that you have heard about from others or experienced yourself? What
caused these doubts?
