# Chapter 2

<!-- page-1 -->

UNIT
WHAT THE BIBLE Is
AND ISN'T
CHAPTER 2 LEARNING OBJECTIVES
Students will be able to:
1. describe what the Bible is and is not. [2.1]
2. identify the impact the Bible has had throughout history. [2.2]
3. list the benefits of studying the Bible. [2.3]
4. explain why the Bible is more like a compass than an instruction book. [2.4]
5. describe what it means to call the Bible God's "revelation." [2.5]
6. identify the two ways God has revealed his nature and character. [2.6]
7. explain what it means to say the Bible is "God's Word." [2.7]
8. compare how knowledge and the Bible relate to one another. [28]
9. assess on what basis the Bible claims to be true. [2.9]
10. explain why truth matters. [2.10]
WHAT IS CULTURE?


<!-- page-2 -->

CHAPTER 2
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
How do you compare to the rest of the country on some basic Bible knowledge? [2.1]
Which of these phrases best describes the Bible: a rule book, an instruction manual,
or a story? [2.1]
3. Has the Bible played a key role in the shaping of America or is that just the Christian
version of history? [2.2]
4. What are some important reasons to study the Bible? [2.2]
5. Can you match the following worldviews with their sacred texts? [2.3]
6. In what ways is the Bible different from these other holy books?
7. What benefits will be gained from a careful study of the Bible? [2.3]
8. How is the Bible more like a compass than an instruction manual? [2.4]


<!-- page-3 -->

CHAPTER 2 DISCUSSION OUESTIONS
9. Why is the Bible a better compass than other holy books? [2.4]
13. What do we mean when we say the Bible is the Word of God? [2.7]
10. What are the only two options when it comes to the origins of religion? [2.5]
14. Can we trust the accuracy of the Bible? [2.7]
11. What does it mean to say that God is personal? [2.5]
15. What does it mean to say the Bible is "inspired" by God? [2.7]
12. What are the two ways in which God reveals his character? [2.6]
16. What does it mean to say the Bible is "inerrant"? [2.7]


<!-- page-4 -->

17. What is the basis for true knowledge? [2.8]
18. Which provides a better basis for true knowledge, "naturalism" or "Christian theism"?
[2.8]
19. Is 100 percent certainty a necessary condition for knowledge? [2.8]
20. Can we know something with certainty if it hasn't been scientifically proven? [2.8]
21. What is the "correspondence theory of truth"? [2.9]
22. What is "relativism" and how is it self-refuting? [2.10]
23. How is the Bible different from any other book? [2.11]


<!-- page-5 -->

"THE BIBLE's INFLUENCE" READINGS
The following articles on the Bible's influence are from a special collection compiled by The
Washington Times. They give a brief overview of the impact the Bible has had on civiliza-
tion in general and Western culture in particular, as well as its influence on literature and
American history. This material wasn't compiled by Christian apologists but by journalists
reporting on the cultural phenomenon of the bestselling book of all time.
"THE BIBLE'S INFLUENCE" DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
Did the Bible become the bestselling book of all time because its message has been
universally accepted and promoted?
To access these readings, go to www.summitu.com/utf
and enter the passcode found in the back of your manual.
2. What are some notable examples of the Bible's impact on literature?
3. Although it is a sacred book, why is it important to read the Bible as literature?


<!-- page-6 -->

"THE BIBLE'S INFLUENCE" DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
4. What role did the Bible play in American history?
"THE CASE FOR TRUTH" VIDEO
J. Warner Wallace gives three reasons why so many Christians lose their faith in college:
(1) poorly prepared students, (2) aggressive, antagonistic campuses, and (3) innately
fallen humans as students. He also exposes the Three Big Lies told at universities today.
Wallace focuses on the understanding of truth, of which he gives four popular views.
He uses Francis Schaffer's illustration of truth as a house, with objective truth residing
on the first floor and subjective opinion residing on the second floor. He defines and
explains the difference between objective and subjective truth and underscores what
makes truth true.
5. How has the Bible shaped American education?
To access this video, go to www.summitu.com/utf and enter the passcode found in the


<!-- page-7 -->

"THE CASE FOR TRUTH" VIDEO OUTLINE
J. Warner Wallace gives three reasons why so many Christians lose their faith while in
college, explains the difference between objective and subjective truth, and gives four
popular views of the understanding of truth.
Why Do Christian College Students Defect?
Christians who attend college leave the faith in large numbers. Between 55 and 80 per-
cent of Christian freshmen aren't practicing Christians as seniors. The primary reasons
are as follows:
1. Poorly
as students
2. Aggressive, antagonistic campuses
3. Inherent fallen human nature
College campuses aren't neutral when it comes to the understanding of truth. Most
Christian students aren't prepared to go into hostile territory. And all of us have a sinful
bent to follow our own fallen desires.
The Difference Between Objective and Subjective Truth
• Objective truth resides in the
• Subjective truth resides in the
_-FACT.
—OPINION.
If your opinion can't change something, that something is objective truth. If your opinion
can change something, that something is subjective truth.
Objective truth claims can be proven true or false because there's an objective reality
against which to judge them. Subjective truth claims can't be proven true or false because
they re personal opinions.
The Three Big Lies Told on College Campuses
1. There's no objective truth; everything is relative.
2. Truth cannot be
3. All views have equal merit and none should be considered better than another.
Four Views of Truth
"THE CASE FOR TRUTH VIDEO OUTLINE
Three Ds of Tolerance
Tolerance is "a fair, objective, and permissive attitude toward those whose opinions,
practices, race, religion, nationality, etc., differ from one's own."
Tolerance requires three Ds:
1. Disagreement
2. Differences
3. Don't be a jerk
: Truth is whatever works.
2. Empiricism: Truth is whatever you can sense.
_: Truth is what you feel.
4. Correspondence theory of truth: Truth is a relationship between what you
think is true and what really is.
WHATTHE BIBLE IS AND ISN'T


<!-- page-8 -->

"THE CASE FOR TRUTH" DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. Between 55 and 80 percent of Christian freshmen aren't practicing Christians as
seniors. Why do so many Christian college students defect?
2. What's the difference between objective and subjective truth?
3. Not all views of truth are the same. What are four different views of truth, and is one
more "true" than the others?
"THE CASE FOR TRUTH" DISCUSSION OUESTIONS
4. What are the Three Big Lies told on college campuses?
5. Why is the popular view of tolerance itself intolerant? What's a better definition of
tolerance?


<!-- page-9 -->

Chapter 2 Key Points
Key Questions:
1. Why are ideas
important?
2. How do ideas
affect us?
3. How do faith and
ideas relate?
Key Terms:
1. Correspondence
Theory of Truth
2. Dead Sea Scrolls
3. General Revelation
4. Inerrancy
5. Knowledge
6. Naturalism
7. Objective Truth
8. Relativism
9. Revelation*
10. Scientism
11. Self-Refuting
Claim
12. Special
Revelation*
13. Subjective Truth
Key Verses:
1. Psalm 19:1-4
2. Psalm 119
3. Luke 1:1-4
4. Romans 1:19-20
5. Romans 2:14-16
6.2 Timothy 3:16
7. Hebrews 1:1-2
Key Works:
1. "Naturalism Defeated"
by Alvin Plantinga
CHAPTER 2 ASSIGNMENT
Answer the following questions with at least one paragraph.
1. What are the differences between general revelation and special revelation?
2. What have Christians traditionally meant by claiming that the Bible is the revealed
Word of God? (Include a discussion of biblical inspiration and inerrancy.)
3. Explain the argument that says naturalism cannot provide as reliable a basis for
knowledge and truth as theism. Give your own opinion and analysis of this argument.
4. How does theism, specifically biblical Christianity, offer a more reliable explanation
for our ability to discover knowledge and truth than naturalism?
*Short answer or essay question on the exam
Other potential questions:
• Do you agree with the definition of knowledge as "justified true belief"?
• What are other definitions of truth you have encountered?
• Do you think that scientism and the "two-story concept of truth" discussed in chapter 1 are the
same thing, related, or unrelated?
