# Chapter 4

<!-- page-1 -->

UNIT
WHAT THE BIBLE SAYS
ABOUT GOD
CHAPTER 4 LEARNING OBJECTIVES
Students will be able to:
1. describe how religion is returning to public life. [4.1]
2. define what it means to be a theologian. [4.2]
articulate how finite human beings can know an infinite God. [4.3]
4. identify what God has revealed about his nature. [4.4]
. 5. state the incommunicable attributes of God. [4.5a-4.5f]
6. state the communicable attributes of God. [4.5g-4.5j]
7. explain what it means to say that God is triune. [4.6]
8. discuss why it is important to understand who God is. [4.7]
CHRISTIANITY AND CULTURE-A PLAN


<!-- page-2 -->

CHAPTER 4
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. Americans' concept of God can be arranged into what four categories? [4.1]
5. What is the definition of "God"? [4.3]
2. How does our view of God affect how we live? [4.1]
6. If God is beyond comprehension, how can we get to know him? [4.3]
3. Why is it true to say that every person is a theologian? [4.2]
7. What does it mean to say, "God is self-existent"? [44]
4. What do people think when they think of God? [4.2]
What does it mean to say, "God is spirit"? [4.4]


<!-- page-3 -->

9. What does it mean to say, "God is personal"? [4.4]
10. What's the difference between "incommunicable attributes" and "communicable
attributes"? [4.5]
11. What does it mean to say, "God is holy"? [4.5]
12. What does it mean to say, "God is eternal"? [4.5]
13. What does it mean to say, "God is all-knowing"? [4.5]
14. What does it mean to say, "God is all-powerful? [4.5]
15. How would you address the question, "If God is omnipotent, can he create an object
so heavy he can't lift it"?
16. What does it mean to say, "God is everywhere present"? (45]


<!-- page-4 -->

17. What does it mean to say, "God is unchanging"? [4.5]
18. How do you understand the passages of Scripture that appear to show God changing
his mind (such as Genesis 6:6; Exodus 32:14; and Jonah).
19. What does it mean to say, "God is wise"? [4.5]
20. What does it mean to say, "God is righteous"? [4.5]
CHAPTER & DISCUSSION OUESTIONS
21. What does it mean to say, "God is loving"? [4.5]
22. What does it mean to say, "God is merciful and gracious"? [4.5]
23. What does it mean to say, "God is Trinity"? [4.6]
24. How does the doctrine of the Trinity distinguish Christian theism from other theistic
worldviews? [4.6]


<!-- page-5 -->

25. What is the only proper response to the scriptural understanding of God? [4.7]
"WHAT DOES CHRISTIANITY SAY ABOUT
THE NATURE OF GOD?" READING
J. Warner Wallace, author of Cold-Case Christianity, explains that, while early Christians
sometimes struggled to understand what the Bible taught about the nature of the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Spirit, they eventually recognized and insisted on two truths: there is only
one God, and the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit are all that same God.
Wallace cites several supporting verses from the Old and New Testaments. He adds confirm-
ing evidence from creation, e.g., the triune nature of the universe and human beings. He also
outlines how Trinitarianism was affirmed by Church Fathers like Augustine, included the
early church creeds, and defended when denied by various heretical groups.
WHAT DOES CHRISTIANITY SAY ABOUT THE NATURE OF GOD?
by J. Warner Wallace
The first year I decided to take a group of students to Utah to share the Gospel
with Mormons, a parent of one of the students asked me why I would take such a
trip: "Why would you want to strip someone of their faith in God and Jesus?" This
question came at a pivotal time for me as a pastor. It caused me to ask myself the
question: What is the difference between the Mormon God and the Christian God?
Is the difference significant? Does it separate who is a Christian from who isn't? As
it turns out, the nature of Jesus, God the Father and Salvation are the core essentials
distinguishing Christianity from other theistic faith systems. If you want to call
yourself a Christian, you'll need to embrace the definitions offered by Christianity.
If you don't you may still be a theist, but you won't be a Christian theist.
While early Christians may have sometimes struggled to understand exactly what the
scriptures taught about the nature of God, Jesus and the Holy Spirit, they eventually
recognized something distinctive about the God described in the New Testament.
The God of Christianity has a triune nature, and His character is reflected in His
creation. The Bible teaches two truths: there is only one God, and God the Father,
Jesus and the Holy Spirit are all that same God:
1. There Is Only One God
Both the New and Old Testament declare there is only one God. Not just one God for
this universe, or many gods united in one purpose, but one God. Both Judaism and
Christianity are clearly monotheistic.


<!-- page-6 -->

Deuteronomy 6:4-5
Hear, O Israel! The LORD is our God, the LORD is one! And you shall love the LORD
your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your might.
Isaiah 43:10
"You are My witnesses," declares the LORD, "And My servant whom I have chosen, In
order that you may know and believe Me, And understand that I am He. Before Me
there was no God formed, And there will be none after Me.
James 2:19
You believe that God is one. You do well; the demons also believe, and shudder.
1 Corinthians 8:4, 6
Therefore concerning the eating of things sacrificed to idols, we know that there is no
such thing as an idol in the world, and that there is no God but one... yet for us there
is but one God, the Father, from whom are all things, and we exist for Him; and one
Lord, Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we exist through Him.
1 Timothy 2:5-6
For there is one God, and one mediator also between God and men, the man Christ
Jesus, who gave Himself as a ransom for all, the testimony borne at the proper time.
From these few verses, it is clear there is only one God according to Jewish and
Christian theology. This is our starting point; this is where we begin. God is ONE.
2. Yet the Father, Son and Holy Ghost Are All God
But there is something else we see in the Scripture. The Bible teaches God the Father,
Jesus Christ and the Holy Spirit are all God. In fact, the Bible teaches all three of these
divine persons are equally Divine. Let's look at some of the ways the three persons share
the exact same nature:
All Three Are the All-Powerful Creator (Omnipotent)
The first characteristic of deity (omnipotence) is possessed by the Father, Son and Holy
Spirit. All three are described in the Bible as being the all-powerful Creator:
But now, O LORD, Thou art our Father, We are the clay, and Thou our potter; And
all of us are the work of Thy hand. (Isaiah 64:8)
All things came into being by Him (Jesus, the Word), and apart from Him nothing
came into being that has come into being. (John 1:3)
"The Spirit of God has made me, And the breath of the Almighty gives me life." (Job 33:4)
All Three Are All-Knowing (Omniscient)
In addition to possessing the power to create, the Father, Son and Holy Spirit are all
observed to be all-knowing according to Bible:
...in whatever our heart condemns us; for God is greater than our heart, and knows
all things. (1 John 3:20)
"Now we know that You (Jesus) know all things, and have no need for anyone to ques-
tion You; by this we believe that You came from God." (John 16:30)
For to us God revealed them through the Spirit; for the Spirit searches all things, even
the depths of God. (1 Corinthians 2:10)
All Three Are All-Present (Omnipresent)
While we assume this of the Father and the Holy Spirit, most people don't realize
the Scripture also describes the Son as having the ability to be everywhere at the
same time (omnipresence):
"But will God indeed dwell on the earth? Behold, heaven and the highest heaven cannot
contain Thee, how much less this house which I have built!" (1 Kings 8:27)
"..teaching them to observe all that I commanded you; and lo, I am with you always,
even to the end of the age." (Matthews 28:20)
Where can I go from Thy Spirit? Or where can I flee from Thy presence? If I ascend
to heaven, Thou art there; If I make my bed in Sheol, behold, Thou art there. If I take
the wings of the dawn, If I dwell in the remotest part of the sea, Even there Thy hand
will lead me, And Thy right hand will lay hold of me. (Psalm 139:7-10)
All Three Are All-Loving (Omnibenevolent)
Another aspect of Godhood, the all-encompassing love of God, is also demonstrated
equally by the Father, Son and the Holy Spirit:
For God so loved the world, that He gave His only begotten Son, that whoever believes
in Him should not perish, but have eternal life. (John 3:16)
Husbands, love your wives, just as Christ also loved the church and gave Himself up
for her (Ephesians 5:25)


<!-- page-7 -->

Now I urge you, brethren, by our Lord Jesus Christ and by the love of the Spirit, to
strive together with me in your prayers to God for me... (Romans 15:30-31)
All Three Are Called "God"
Now you are starting to see why we must conclude God the Father, Jesus Christ and
the Holy Spirit are all God. In fact, the Bible explicitly calls all three of them God:
Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. (Philippians 1:2)
In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God.
(John 1:1)
But Peter said, "Ananias, why has Satan filled your heart to lie to the Holy Spirit, and
to keep back some of the price of the land? "While it remained unsold, did it not remain
your own? And after it was sold, was it not under your control? Why is it that you have
conceived this deed in your heart? You have not lied to men, but to God." (Acts 5:3-4)
To Deny the Trinity is to Deny Christianity
Even the earliest believers understood the importance of this truth (and apparent
tension) in the nature of God. There is one God, and the Father, the Son and the
Holy Spirit are all God. This is clear in the Scripture, and while it may be mysteri-
ous to us, it is the objective claim of the Bible. The first Christians understood the
importance of retaining this truth about God in order to retain the true identity of
Jesus. When early Christians tried to maintain the oneness of God without regard
to the Divine description of Jesus and the Holy Spirit as we've just described, they
usually redefined (and mischaracterized) Jesus as a human, limited, or finite creature.
But, if Jesus is not God in every sense of the word (as the Bible claims), then He does
not have the power to save us on the Cross. If Jesus is not God Incarnate, then he
simply cannot take our place and bestow upon us the righteousness of God. For this
reason, the earliest leaders were very careful to describe the triune nature of God
as seen in the Bible. They eventually described God as one in substance, essence or
nature, while being distinctly but undividedly three in person. This was reflected in
the early creeds, including the Athanasian Creed of the 4th Century:
"... we worship one God in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity; Neither confounding the
persons nor dividing the substance. For there is one person of the Father, another of
the Son, and another of the Holy Spirit. But the Godhead of the Father, of the Son,
and of the Holy Spirit is all one, the glory equal, the majesty coeternal... And in this
Trinity none is afore or after another; none is greater or less than another. But the
whole three persons are coeternal, and coequal. So that in all things, as aforesaid, the
Unity in Trinity and the Trinity in Unity is to be worshipped. He therefore that will
be saved must thus think of the Trinity."
It's interesting this creed (widely accepted and used in Western Christianity) affirms
that without a proper understanding of the nature of the Trinity, one cannot even
be saved. Augustine (the well respected and influential philosopher and theologian
who became bishop of the North African City of Hippo Regius) agreed a proper
understanding of the Trinity was critical to understanding Christianity and grasping
the power and Salvation of God:
"And I would make this pious and safe agreement, in the presence of our Lord God,
with all who read my writings, as well in all other cases as, above all, in the case of
those which inquire into the unity of the Trinity, of the Father and the Son and the
Holy Spirit; because in no other subject is error more dangerous, or inquiry more
laborious, or the discovery of truth more profitable." (Augustine, On the Trinity 1:3:5)
Why is a proper understanding of the Trinity so important? Because all deviations
from historical Trinitarianism have compromised the eternal, divine nature of
Jesus. It's that simple. Over the course of history, several groups have mischaracter-
ized the Trinity and, therefore, mischaracterized the true nature of Jesus. The Early
Church Councils corrected the errors of Adoptionism (2nd Century), Docetism
(2nd Century), Monarchianism (2nd and 3rd Century), Sabellianism (3rd Century),
Arianism (4th Century), and Socinianism (16th and 17th Century). In addition to
these historic mischaracterizations of the triune nature of God, there are several
current mischaracterizations, including the polytheism of the Church of Jesus Christ
of Latter Day Saints, and the denial of the Trinity present in many Unitarian groups,
including the Christadelphians.
Christianity emphatically claims that God is TRIUNE in nature. Not polytheistic,
but triune. It's not about three gods (1+1+1=3); it's about three distinct persons
within the Godhead (1x1x1=1). Once someone moves from this description of God
(one in substance but three in person, distinct but undivided), he or she has simply
moved away from Orthodox Christianity. This belief may find a home in some other
worldview, but is no longer a reflection of the Christian Worldview.
Is The Triune Nature of God Reflected In His Creation?
The concept of the Trinity is incredibly difficult to grasp. In large part, it is completely
mysterious and impossible for us to understand or communicate thoroughly. But
would you really expect anything less? Would you really think God could be so easily
grasped or described? Is it reasonable to expect limited creatures such as humans
to be able to completely understand and render the nature of an incredibly vast and
powerful Being? Perhaps this is why the triune nature of God is difficult to understand
and a challenge to communicate to others. Many metaphors have been attempted
over the years, but most are simply a poor reflection of the truth of God's nature.
But there is some evidence for the triune nature of God in the world around us. If we
look at the nature of our universe and our own bodies, we do see the fingerprints of
a triune God. And that really should come as no surprise to us, given the fact God
is the creator of everything, and His creation reflects His Nature:


<!-- page-8 -->

Genesis 1:1
In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth.
Genesis 1:27
And God created man in His own image, in the image of God He created him; male
and female He created them.
If God's creation reflects His nature, we might expect to see this in the nature of the
universe and the nature of human beings:
The Triune Nature of the Universe
Science tells us the universe in which we live is finite and had a single point of origin.
Science continues to confirm the fact there was a point of Cosmological Singularity
(often called the "Big Bang"). Scientists describe this event as the beginning of all
space, time and matter. Science continues to divide and describe the physical universe
in this triune manner. Is this simply evidence of the triune nature of its Creator? It's
interesting to note that each of these three properties of the universe are also triune
within their own natures:
Space
Dimensions in space are typically measured in degrees of height, width and depth
(spacially three dimensional)
Time
Time is typically understood as it relates to the past, present or the future (temporally
three dimensional)
Matter
Matter is typically measured and divided into categories of solid, liquid and gas (cat-
egorically three dimensional
The Triune Nature of Human Beings
In addition to God's creation of space, time and manner, we need look no further
than our own lives to see the nature of the Triune God evident within us. Each of us
is comprised of a body, spirit and soul:
1 Thessalonians 5:23-24
Now may the God of peace Himself sanctify you entirely; and may your spirit and soul
and body be preserved complete, without blame at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Hebrews 4:12-13
For the word of God is living and active and sharper than any two-edged sword, and
piercing as far as the division of soul and spirit, of both joints and marrow, and able
to juage the thoughts and intentions of the heart.
Even though the concept of the Trinity is difficult to grasp in relationship to the
Divine Nature of God, it appears to be clearly evident in the nature of God's creation.
All worldviews have distinctive beliefs characterizing and distinguishing them from
other ways of viewing the world. Christianity is no different. When it comes to the
nature of God, trinitarianism is a Christian distinctive. It has been affirmed by be-
lievers over the centuries, not as a random construct, but as a true reflection of the
Biblical teaching. The best and most reasonable way to interpret what the Bible teaches
about the nature of God the Father, Jesus Christ and the Holy Spirit is to conclude
that God is one in essence and three in persons. As mysterious as this may be, it is
the claim of Scripture. As exclusive as this claim may seem, it is the defining and
distinctive teaching of the Bible. To reject the Trinity is to reject the clear teaching of
the Scriptures. To deny the triune nature of God is to deny the claim of Christianity
and to redefine oneself as something other than Christian.
This essay originally appeared on the website http://coldcasechristianity.com/2014/what-does-christianity-say-
about-the-nature-of-god/. It is reproduced here with the permission of the author.


<!-- page-9 -->

"WHAT DOES CHRISTIANITY SAY ABOUT THE
NATURE OF GOD?" DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
What makes Christianity different from other theistic faith systems?
"WHAT DOES CHRISTIANITY SAY ABOUT THE NATURE OF GOD?" DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
4. What did the early church creeds affirm about the nature of God?
5. How is the triune nature of God reflected in his creation?
2. What is the biblical basis for the doctrine of the Trinity?
3. Is it possible to deny the doctrine of the Trinity and still be a Christian?
-% -


<!-- page-10 -->

"HOW TO KNOW THE WILL OF GOD" VIDEO
Wayne House starts this lecture with examples of areas where the will of God is made clear
in Scripture and other areas where specific directions aren't given. He talks about three
things that cause confusion regarding the will of God and then explains the distinction
between God's determinative will, which is proactive and reactive, and his desired will.
House makes a distinction between the permissive will and the directive will of God.
He concludes with two key questions to ask in discerning the will of God: (1) Does our
decision violate the clear teaching of Scripture? (2) Is our decision in line with how God
has prepared us throughout life?
To access this video, go to www.summitu.com/utf and enter the passcode found in the
back of your manual.
"HOW TO KNOW THE WILL OF GOD" VIDEO OUTLINE
Wayne House describes some areas of confusion regarding the will of God:
• We think God desires to give us
information about his
plans for the world, including our lives. And he doesn't.
• We think we can figure out through some means what God wants us to do in every
area of life. And we can't.
• We think we can understand God's will through
we have.
But they aren't reliable guides.
The Bible clearly tells us a lot of things that are or are not the will of God. We don't have
to pray to know his will in these areas.
God's Determinative Will: What God Decides to Do
God has a will that is free, perfect, infinite, and certain. Some things he keeps to himself,
the rest he has revealed through his Word. We cannot know his determinative will other
than by the clear statements or precepts of Scripture.
God has the power to accomplish everything that conforms to his
so when something does not happen, it's because it wasn't in accordance with his will.
God works
when he directly causes things to happen that he
wills from eternity. God works_
when he responds to our deci-
sions and actions.
God's Desired Will: What God Desires Us to Do
God makes his will obvious to us through
• our nature;
• Scripture; and
• wise counsel.
Human
is an aspect of our finite, personal nature and is severely
affected by sin. That's why we need to ask some key questions when making decisions:
1. Does our decision violate the clear teaching of Scripture?
2. Have we sought and followed wise counsel?
3. Is our decision in line with how God has prepared us throughout our lives?
4. Do we have peace with God?
-7h-


<!-- page-11 -->

"HOW TO KNOW THE WILL OF GOD" DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. What are some areas in which it is appropriate to seek God's will? What are some
areas in which it is unnecessary?
"HOW TO KNOW THE WILL OF GOD" DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
4. What is God's "desired will"?
5. What are the main questions to ask when trying to discern the will of God?
2. What are some misconceptions we have about knowing God's will?
3. What is God's "determinative will"?


<!-- page-12 -->

Chapter 4 Key Points
Key Questions:
1. What has God revealed
about his nature?
2. What is the doctrine of
the Trinity?
2. Aseity
4. Deism
6. Eternal
7. Eros
8. Grace
13. Mercy*
14. Modalism
15. Omnipotent
16. Omnipresent
17. Omniscient
18. Pantheism
19. Perfect Being
Theology
20. Philos
21. Transcendent
22. Tri-theism
CHAPTER 4 ASSIGNMENT
Key Verses:
1. Deuteronomy 6:4
2. Psalm 103:8
3. Psalm 139:7-10
4. Mark 10:27
5. Titus 3:5
6.1 John 4:8-10
Key Players:
1. Anselm of Canterbury
Answer the following questions with at least one paragraph.
1. If God is "the greatest possible being" and beyond our ability to comprehend, how
much can we know about him, if anything?
2. Briefly explain the doctrines of God's transcendence and immanence. How do deism
and pantheism misunderstand and misapply these doctrines?
3. According to Erik Thoennes, "Biblical Christianity stands or falls on the doctrine of the
Trinity!" What is the doctrine of the Trinity, how does the Bible reveal this doctrine,
and what are the mistakes or distortions of this doctrine described in the chapter?
*Short answer or essay question on the exam
4. How do Muslims understand and try to refute the doctrine of the Trinity?
Other potential questions:
• What do you think it means to say that we are all theologians? Do you agree?
• What are some differences between being a theologian and being religious?
