# Chapter 5

<!-- page-1 -->

UNIT
THE BIBLE: GOD'S
BIG STORY 1
CHAPTER 5 LEARNING OBJECTIVES
Students will be able to:
articulate humanity's role in God's story. [5.1]
distinguish between a metanarrative and a story. [5.2]
identify why it is possible to have a true metanarrative. [5.3]
4. summarize how the Bible functions as a metanarrative. [5.4]
recall the six parts of the outline of the biblical metanarrative. [5.5]
list the attributes of God found in the Genesis creation account. [5.5]
explain how the two creation accounts in Genesis complement each. [5.6a]
8. explain how the creation account showcases God's glory. [5.6b]
9. explain how the creation account establishes order. [5.6c]
10. explain how the creation account confronts paganism. [5.6d]
11. explain how the creation account establishes humans as the climax of creation. [5.6e]
12. explain how the creation account gives meaning to humanity's mission. [5.6f]
13. explain how the creation account gives meaning to sexuality. [5.6g]
THINKING AND SPEAKING CLEARLY


<!-- page-2 -->

CHAPTER 5
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
What is a "metanarrative"? Can you summarize the metanarrative of the Bible in
one paragraph? [5.1]
2. What are the key elements in a well-written story? [5.2]
3. What is "historical narrative" and what part does it play in the Bible? [5.2]
Can you summarize the metanarratives of the main non-Christian worldviews in a
sentence? [5.2]
What do we mean when we say the Bible's metanarrative is true? [5.2]
How would you define "myth"? Is the Bible a myth? [5.3]
How do postmodernists treat all metanarratives, including the biblical one? [5.3]
8. Are many biblical authors aware their stories are part of a larger story? [5.4]


<!-- page-3 -->

9. Can you outline the biblical story as a drama about the kingdom of God? [5.5]
10. What are four benefits of understanding the metanarrative of Scripture? [5.5]
11. What different contexts will help us understand the creation story in Genesis? [5.6]
12. What are some differences between the creation accounts in Genesis 1 and 2? [5.6]
13. What can we learn about God's nature and character from the creation account? [5.6]
14. What are some differences between the biblical creation account and pagan creation
accounts? [5.6]
15. What does the biblical creation account affirm about creation and the creator? [5.6]
16. What are some implications of humanity being created in "the image of God"? [5.6]


<!-- page-4 -->

17. How does the biblical creation account contradict pagan ideas about humanity? [5.6]
21. What aspects of creation remain unchanged despite humanity's fall into sin? [5.7]
18. What role did God assign human beings in creation? [5.6]
19. What are some implications of humans being made as male and female? [5.6]
20. What impact should the Genesis account of humanity's creation (Genesis 1:27, 2:21-
25) have on our understanding of homosexuality and gay marriage? [5.6]
THE BIBLE: GOD'S BIG STORY1


<!-- page-5 -->

"7 LIES CHRISTIANS BELIEVE ABOUT SEX" READING
Today' reading is from pastor Frank Powell. In "7 Lies Christians Believe about Sex," Powell
reviews what the Bible says about sex, explains why God created it, and outlines the role it
was meant to play in our lives.
What had originally been a beautiful gift from God has been distorted and twisted by sin.
That's why "sex" and "porn" are two of the most searched words on the web and why thirty
percent of the internet is pornographic in nature.
It's important to gain a proper understanding of God's design and purpose for sex. Some of
these questions may feel uncomfortable, but remember that God gave us sex as a gift and he
wants us to understand it as he does.
7 LIES CHRISTIANS BELIEVE ABOUT SEX
by Frank Powell
Things aren't always as they seem. Take Prince Hans in the movie Frozen, for example.
That fool pretends to be a charming, stand-up guy. And when Anna needs him most,
Prince Hans pulls an Okie-Doke on her, leaving her for dead. What a jerk.
I seriously think I threw my couch pillow at the TV the first time I saw it. My wife
then stared at me with a look like, "Did you really just throw a pillow at the TV over
a cartoon movie?"
I was slightly embarrassed. But I don't regret my actions.
Hollywood has built an industry on the "Prince Hans Principle" (yeah, I just made
that up). Movies will paint a character one way, then drop the bombshell. But let's
be honest. Hollywood doesn't hold the rights to this principle. Unfortunately, things
aren't always as they seem in the real world either. This is true of people, political
and social ideas, and everything in between.
If you grew up in Christian culture, the "Prince Hans Principle" applies to many
things, but it especially applies to sex. I remember the first time someone told me sex
was a gift from God. I wasn't sure if I wanted to slap them for insulting God or cry
because they might actually be right. In the days and weeks that followed, I started
to realize sex was a gift from God.
And it changed everything.
You see, I always thought sex was from Satan. Christians just borrowed it for pro-
creation or something. But the more I talked to other people and studied Scripture,
the more I realized things weren't as they seem.
*100 -
Today, I see sex as a beautiful, powerful gift from God. But getting to this point
wasn't easy. And I still have baggage from the years of lies I had to destroy. Some
(or maybe most) of these lies I acquired from my Christian culture. Others I picked
up from Hollywood, friends, etc.
Regardless, here are seven lies Christians believe about sex.
1.) Sex is dirty, nasty and only useful for procreation.
So, what if I told you sex is a gift from God? I know. That destroys the foundation
of your understanding of sex. But it's true. Sex isn't dirty and nasty. And its purpose
isn't solely to keep the world populated.
But, for most Christians, sex is like that annoying family member. You know the one.
God didn't bless him (or her) with qualities like self-awareness. But he has a double
portion of obnoxiousness. You dread family gatherings because the annoying family
member will be there. But it's your family. So, what choice do you have?
Sex and Christians have a similar relationship. We seem to tolerate sex because it is
necessary to carry on the family name. But aside from that, it has no real purpose.
So, we just deal with it. Because, well, we have to.
What if Christians embraced sex as a gift from God? What if the church viewed sex
as a gift to be enjoyed by two people within the covenant bond of marriage? What
if the church encouraged married people to explore sex? What if the church taught
and discipled single people to see sex as a form of enjoyment and pleasure instead
of the annoying family member no one wants to be around?
We might just build anticipation and excitement around God's design for sex. Maybe
single people would want to know more about this gift. And maybe they would share
their current sexual struggles because they want to enjoy God's gift ... God's way.
2.) Casual sex is fun and innocent. Everyone else is doing it.
So, golf is fun. White water rafting is fun. Sex is... fun? Is that how far sex has fallen
in our culture?
Well done, Satan. Let's give him a hand, guys. He has taken a mysterious, private
and extremely powerful gift and turned it into something ... fun? Something like
golf and white water rafting. Something recreational. Really?
Don't get me wrong. Sex is fun. But it's more than a recreational activity. Much more.
And while our schools give condoms to sixth graders, the church does little to raise
expectations around sex. It's almost as though Christians believe it's better to hand
out condoms than teach abstinence.
Look, it's not a stretch to say marriage in our country is falling apart (at least partly)
because sex has lost its mystery. Sex is nothing more than a recreational activity.
It's fun.


<!-- page-6 -->

Meanwhile, God says sex binds two people together physically, emotionally and
spiritually. There's nothing simple about that. Until sex is seen as a powerful expres-
sion of covenant love, wrapped in mystery and complexity, marriages will continue
to fall apart.
3.) It's OK to have sex if I am in love.
In 10th grade, my U.S. History teacher said something I will never forget. "Love is
not something you fall in and out of. Love isn't primarily a feeling. It's primarily a
decision."
Now, if you are wondering how love and U.S. History are connected, I wonder the
same thing. But don't derail my point.
At the time, I thought my teacher was ignorant. After all, as a 10th grader I had
fallen in love several times. But now I see that I was never in love. I was infatuated.
Sex isn't for two people who are "in love" Sex is for two people who are married.
Two people committed to one another for the duration of their earthly lives. If you
and your "boo" are madly in love, get married. If you can't get married because you
are 15, trust God's eternal plan for sex is better than your present one.
Sex outside of God's design will always be a source of brokenness because it's for
people who are married, not people who are "in love."
4.) If I remain pure before marriage, God will reward me with great sex.
Yeah, I thought this before I was married. And it's not that the statement was made
explicitly. But somehow, I concluded it. And I have talked to other Christians who
concluded the same thing. So, there must be something in the church water.
I am going to be real. Five years of marriage has taught me that sex is hard work.
Yes, it's pleasurable. But if you believe angels are going to sing,
"Hallelujah!" while
fireworks cascade around you the first time you have sex, prepare for disappointment.
So, why save yourself for marriage? Because it throws out any chance for comparison
or emotional residue. It frees you and your current (or future) spouse to explore sex
without baggage.
That's worth the wait. I promise.
5.) If I have sex before marriage, I am tainted forever.
The church has implicitly and explicitly) taught this for decades. And i's not true.
Yes, it is God's desire for every man and woman to enter marriage without a sexual
past. But its also God's nature to take even the worst scenario and make it beautiful.
So, if you made mistakes sexually, God can and will forgive you. If you are a victim
of sexual abuse, God can and will heal you. Don't believe the lies you hear. You can
still be used by God. You can still have a marriage that flourishes, and you can still
enjoy sex with your current (or future) spouse.
But you must let go of shame and trust God's power to completely forgive you.
6.) If I think about sex, I am wrong.
God created you with sexual desires. And he doesn't expect you to suppress them.
Satan an open door.
He expects you to control them. And, again, the church's failure to address sex gives
I will be the first to say lust is sin. Jesus makes it cut and dry (Matt. 5:28-29). But
almost every teaching I hear on lust begins and ends like this:
"Lust is wrong. Don't do it. Let's pray."
What the church needs to do is differentiate between lust and sexual desire. Lust is
desiring something that is not yours. Lust is looking at another human being more
as a piece of meat than a creation of God.
Sexual desire, however, is natural and healthy. It must be controlled. Of course. But
it's natural. So, don't suppress your sexual desires. If you do, don't expect to turn
them on when you get married. At the same time, don't give in to your sexual desires.
Pray for self-control. Have an accountability group. Talk to someone you know and
trust. But don't give in.
7.) Having sex is a more significant sin than porn, masturbation or lust.
This was my attitude as a teenager and young adult. I knew sex was wrong. And I
thought that having sex outside of marriage would result in God turning me into a
gnome or something.
So, how might a teenager afraid of becoming a gnome keep himself from having
sex? Use other means to "release" what I thought was uncontrollable sexual desire.
"What's the problem, Frank? That sounds like a great idea?"
Yeah, except it's not.
Going back to Jesus, he says, "The mouth speaks what the heart is full of" (Matt
12:34). What is Jesus really saying here? Your external actions are just an overflow
of your heart's desires.
So, having sex is simply an outpouring of a heart and mind filled with lust and
impure thoughts. There is no distinction between adultery (having sex and porn,
masturbation or lust (other means). What matters is the condition of your heart.
The goal for Christian purity isn't physical abstinence as much as it is a heart free
from impurity and lust.
This essay originally appeared on the website http://churchleaders.com/pastors/pastor-articles/258399-7-lies-
christians-believe sex html. It is reproduced here with the permission of the author.
-US•


<!-- page-7 -->

"7 LIES CHRISTIANS BELIEVE ABOUT SEX" DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
"7 LIES CHRISTIANS BELIEVE ABOUT SEX" DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. What does it mean to say that sex is a gift from God?
4. What is the difference between lust and sexual desire?
2. Why isn't it okay for two people who are in love to have sex?
5. How can the church help Christians understand and enjoy sex?
3. What happens if you have sex before marriage?


<!-- page-8 -->

"CREATION ACCOUNTS AND ANCIENT NEAR EASTERN
RELIGIONS" READING
Archaeology has unearthed ancient writings that flesh out the cultures that surrounded and
aWn carts ancient Near Eastern religious texts
and their gods with the God of the Bible.
This article looks at the creation stories from Canaan, Mesopotamia, and Egypt, including
the num Els the Adapa Epic, and the Atrahasis Epic. The authors note the similarities in
language and story elements among these stories and the Genesis account of creation. Then
they show how many of these similarities dissolve upon closer examination, while many
of the key elements of the biblical creation story have no parallel among Israel's neighbors.
CREATION ACCOUNTS AND ANCIENT NEAR EASTERN RELIGIONS
by John A. Bloom and C. John Collins
Over the past two hundred years, the science of archaeology has developed and given
us direct access to documents and artifacts from the lands of the Bible.
While often fragmentary and difficult to interpret, these ancient writings flesh out
the cultures that surrounded and influenced ancient Israel. Of particular interest
are ancient near eastern religious texts, because they allow us to compare the gods
of Canaan, Mesopotamia, and Egypt with the God of the Bible.
Since their discovery, many scholars have claimed that the religious views found in
these ancient documents are hardly different from those in the Bible; in fact, the
ancient Israelites simply borrowed the beliefs of their neighbors. Nowhere are these
scholars more assured that Israel parroted others than in the creation account and
early history found in Genesis 1-11.
While years of study are necessary to read these creation accounts in the original
languages, good English translations are now available, so that I [JB] can pass along
some good advice that I received some years ago. In a class discussing the canon
of Scripture-which books should be included in the Bible, and which ones should
not be— the instructor made this comment. "I's actually very easy to tell: just read
them." When investigating claims that the biblical creation account is just borrowed
from elsewhere, my advice is the same: read the other accounts, noting not only the
slight similarities but also the significant differences between them, and the Genesis
account will clearly stand out as superior! In fact, many scholars today recognize
that these creation stories, from which earlier scholars thought Israel had borrowed,
actually have very little in common with the Bible.
A Babylonian Genesis?
No ancient creation account is cited more for its supposed parallels to early Genesis
than the Babylonian poem called Enuma Elish (from its two opening words in Ak-
kadian, "when on high") This story includes a description of the conflict between
the younger god Marduk and the older goddess Tiamat; after Marduk slew Tiamat,
he used her body to make the world.
Part of the appeal for this comparison comes from the simple fact that Enuma Elish
was one of the first texts discovered from the ancient Near East that covers the making
of the world. Further, the Akkadian name Tiamat seems to be parallel to the Hebrew
word for "the deep," tehom (Gen. 1:2), which led some scholars to think of Genesis
1 as describing a conflict of sorts between God and the forces of nature, or even a
sea monster; this gains some traction from the possibility that "without form and
void" is a paraphrase for "chaos." The opening words of the Akkadian story, "when
on high," also influenced some to argue that the opening words of Genesis should
be translated "when God began to create" (see the alternate translation of the RSV)?
Although some biblical scholars continue to make these comparisons, Assyriologists
are now less likely to endorse the comparison than formerly. Partly this is due to the
work of W. G. Lambert, who argued: "The first major conclusion is that the Epic of
Creation [another name for Enuma Elish] is not a norm of Babylonian or Sumerian
cosmology. It is a sectarian and aberrant combination of mythological threads woven
into an unparalleled compositum."
Many have come to acknowledge that the supposed parallel between Babylonian
Tiamat and Hebrew tehom ("the deep") is very unlikely. The linguistic details show
that there is no way that Hebrew tehom can be a borrowing from Akkadian Tiamat;
likewise, "without form and void" (Gen. 1:2) is a phrase, not for "unruly and dis-
orderly chaos," but for "an unproductive and uninhabited place. Further, nothing
in Genesis 1 can be reasonably said to imply any kind of struggle on God's part:
Psalm 33:9 ("for he spoke, and it came to be; he commanded, and it stood firm") is
an excellent summary of the creation story.
A Babylonian Adam?
The Adapa Epic is a Babylonian story about a man whom many compare with the
biblical Adam. In this tale, Adapa was fishing one day in the Persian Gulf when the
south wind suddenly overturned his boat. Adapa cursed the wind, breaking one of
its wings so that it could not blow for seven days. Hearing of this, Anu, the sky god,
summoned Adapa to give account for himself; but before Adapa went, the god Ea
(whom Adapa served) instructed him on how to conduct himself in the heavenly
court, and warned him that they might offer him the food and water of death, which
he must not eat or drink. Adapa followed Ea's instructions and found favor with Anu,
who decided to offer him the food and water of life—which would have conferred
immortality. But Adapa heeded Ea's warning and refused, much to Anu's astonish-
ment, and was sent back to earth as a mortal to live among mankind, apparently
bringing illness to those among whom he lived.


<!-- page-9 -->

It is possible that Adapa actually existed; he is listed as the first of the seven Meso-
potamian sages who lived before the great flood. No one knows when the story was
First composed: the earliest tablets we have date to the fifteenth to fourteenth century
BC, but the story appears to have an early Sumerian origin.
Some have argued that the name Adapa could be linguistically related to Adam,
since there are other examples of the p/m connection.? One difficulty with this idea
is that forms of the proper name Adam (with an m) are attested as far back in West
Semitic materials as we can look; this makes it harder to explain why anyone could
have "borrowed" a figure named Adapa (with a p) into a West Semitic language
(such as Hebrew). Indeed, the name Adapa might actually be Sumerian (and thus
non- Semitic), rather than Akkadian (a Semitic language, related to Hebrew).?
Another hindrance to an easy parallel with Adam is that Adapa is a sage, an advisor
to king Alulim (the first king of Sumer, according to the Sumerian King List), so
Adapa is not the first or only male human, or even the foremost leader of human-
ity. Some interpreters suggest that Adapa had some kind of representative role for
other people: they translate line 6 as "Ba created him [Adapa) as a leader (or model)
among mankind," while others call him a "protecting spirit (?)" among mankind.!!
But even if Adapa was a leader of sorts, there is nothing in the text that implies that
he had the opportunity to gain immortality for anyone other than himself. Those
he may have represented (the residents of the city of Eridu) are not mentioned, and
there is definitely no reason to suppose that he represented all humanity.
The stories are different thematically as well. Adapa had a chance to gain immortal-
ity for himself (he was clearly not the first human), but he missed it out of obedi-
ence to instructions given him by the god he served. There is no indication that his
"transgression" (breaking the wing of the south wind) was the first offense committed
by a human being, and it is certainly not the reason he was condemned to remain
mortal. On the other hand, Adam fell from his pristine state of moral innocence by
disobeying God's command.
The only real thematic parallel is the question of personal faith: Adapa exercised it,
while Adam failed. As Giorgio Buccellati observed, "This [story] is, I would submit,
one of the few cases where Babylonian mythology presents us with a phenomenon
of what one may properly call faith? Adapa has a personal relationship with a that
prompts him to bear witness to his god even in front of other gods and even at the
risk of dangerous consequences?"
Here again we see a situation where superficial similarities (in the names "Adam"
and "Adapa" and in the topic of immortality) led scholars to presume that the bibli-
cal story was borrowed from a Mesopotamian source, but on closer inspection the
minor parallels are washed out by the very substantial differences between the nar-
ratives. The most we can say is that all people yearn for immortality and offer various
explanations for how it escaped them. The Adapa story, like much Mesopotamian
material, identifies a human problem but gives an utterly inadequate explanation."
Universal Language and the Confusion of Speech
Another example of a proposed Hebrew borrowing from Sumerian literature that
has dissolved on closer inspection is a passage in Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta,
which Samuel Noah Kramer believed "puts it beyond all doubt that the Sumerians
believed that there was a time when all mankind spoke one and the same language,
and that it was Enki, the Sumerian god of wisdom, who confounded their speech,"
implying that the biblical story "goes back to cuneiform literary sources Later
study of this complicated text led others to conclude that this omen is not referring
to a past golden age that was ended by the confusion of tongues, but just the op-
the same language.!
posite: it looks forward to a future glorious time when all people will praise Enlil in
A Golden Age
The biblical idea of a past golden age for humans is not as prevalent in ancient
literature as was once thought. In most accounts, the first people are primitive,
and then later the gods give them culture so that they might better serve the gods.
Interpreting the story of Enki and Ninhursag as a golden age myth is now seen as a
figment of scholarly imagination. The search for similarities between Genesis and
other literature led scholars to misinterpret the idioms in the opening lines of this
myth so that they fit the Garden of Eden story! Once again we find that seeking
parallels can be misleading: one must never forget to look for differences and to keep
the broader context of the passages in view.!?
The Creative Word
In an Egyptian creation account from Memphis, the god Ptah speaks new things into
existence: "All the divine order really came into being through what the heart of
Ptah] thought and the tongue commanded"2 This method of creation is certainly
in line with the God of the Bible commanding, "Let there be, and is a step above
the standard sexual procreation method of creation found elsewhere. However, it
seems strange to assert that Israel borrowed this unique concept from one among
dozens of different Egyptian creation accounts, when the decrees of a king would
be more familiar to the audience. There is no need to appeal to the similarities in a
pagan creation account when the commands of any powerful leader will do.
As already hinted, the standard model of creation in the ancient Near East is sexual
procreation (or masturbation, if only one god is involved): Pre-existing, primordial
water is the first god(s) and through procreation new generations of gods are pro-
duced, bringing greater differentiation in the material (land, sky, air, rivers, etc.)
with each succeeding generation. Strikingly, the ex nihilo creation of the material
world by a transcendent, immaterial, pre-existing God is unique to the Bible and
has no parallel in the ancient Near East.?' Even the Egyptian god Ptah, who offers
the closest parallel when he creates the other gods by thought and speech, is himself
created from primordial water.? Scholars who claim that Genesis 1:1 does not teach
this run afoul of the many other passages that repeat the point that God spoke the
universe into existence out of nothing (Ps. 33:6, 9; John 1:3; Rom. 4:17; Heb. 11:3).
-U9
UNIT5


<!-- page-10 -->

Humans from Clay
Another oft-cited parallel with Egyptian literature is the creation of people from
dav on a potter's wheel by the god Khnum. which his consort Heket animates with
the "breath of life? But it appears that Khnum creates every person and animal
in this manner, not just the first man. Although the creation of people from clay
mixed with the breath or blood of a god also occurs in many Mesopotamian texts,
the clay theme itself is not universal: one text speaks of people springing up from
the earth like grain, seeded by the blood of two gods? another relates how people
simply emerge from the ground as Enlil hoes it.26
Did Israel Borrow Myths as Their Pre-History?
Despite the great variation in creation accounts, there are some significant similari-
ties between Genesis and Mesopotamian accounts (especially the Atrahasis Epic)
regarding early human history: after people are created, they multiply, are nearly
destroyed by a catastrophic flood, and afterward the survivors multiply again. Is this
sequence something that the Hebrews borrowed from Mesopotamian sources, or is
there a common memory from prehistorical times (i.e., before writing), which the
two cultures preserved? Most secular biblical scholars dismiss the idea of a great
deluge as myth and can only imagine that Israel borrowed the story. It is interesting
that many Assyriologists are willing to allow that the deluge stories may reflect an
actual catastrophic historical or pre-historical event."
In reviewing ancient texts for writing this article, I [JB] found it interesting that all
of the stories relating to the creation of humans treat people generically or in groups
(cultured/uncultured, learned/unlearned, Sumerian/barbarian). No text presents
the creation of a single person such as Adam, or a first couple, from whom all other
people are descended. The most detailed creation account regarding humans is the
Atrahasis epic, where the gods create seven couples from clay and the blood of a
god. Given this generic creation of groups or of whole populations by the gods, most
cultures apparently saw no need to explain how all races and peoples are descended
from one couple. Thus Sumerian genealogies trace political leaders (kingship) in one
region, 2 but we find nothing like the Table of Nations (Genesis 10) or the origin of
language diversity (Genesis 11) in ancient near eastern literature. The other races
and languages that any ancient people encountered were presumably explained as
the creation of other gods, or as variant creations by their own gods.?
The Uniqueness of the Biblical Creation Account
Creation accounts served important functions in ancient cultures, telling people what
their purpose in life was, justifying their political structure, and establishing their
local god as the head of the pantheon. Outside of Israel, the purpose of humans was
clear and simple: to supply the needs of their gods through the leadership of their
king and priests. Beyond this universal theme, however, these creation accounts
show such great variety and imagination that it does not appear their authors are
intending to present as history the creative steps that their gods took to form the
rent sociological setting. 30
worla: the creation story only serves as a backdrop to justify and establish the cur-
The secular scholar views Genesis in a similar way, noting that it is an eclectic text,
strangely borrowing themes from Egyptian, Mesopotamian, and possibly Canaanite
sources (the Canaanite documents that would confirm this melting-pot thesis are
conveniently lacking) to weave a monotheistic creation myth. However, reading
these other creation accounts with an eye to spot their differences and not merely
their similarities paints a different picture: Genesis tells of one transcendent God,
who alone made and rules the heavens and the earth, and all that is in them; there is
nothing left for any other god— if it exists—to do. And far from mankind being made
to relieve God of work He did not like doing, they are dignified with His image, and
with the task of ruling the creation in a wise and benevolent way. The painful toil
people now experience is not a proper part of the creation; it results from human
disobedience, which requires divine redemption. By affirming human unity in Adam
and Eve, Genesis lays the foundation for Israels calling to bring light to the world.
The goal of early Genesis is not to entertain its listeners nor to justify the political
status quo, but to convey a history of God's actions in creating the world for man, its
caretaker, to enjoy in fellowship with his Creator. Of course Genesis uses language
and imagery that made sense to the original audience, but these images are universal,
timeless, and transcultural, conveying a sequence of creation events both to primi-
tive cultures and to modern scientific ones. It is only the presumption that Genesis
cannot be relating history and revelation from God" that leads many to seek other
ways to account for the text. For those who do not have these biases, the uniqueness
of Genesis is readily apparent if they read the other ancient accounts for themselves.
Ancient near eastern parallels provide some helpful cultural insights, but they do
not explain the Genesis creation account away.
This essay originally appeared as an article in volume 35, number 1 (2012) of The Christian Research Journal, It is
reproduced here with the permission of its authors.
'An excellent anthology is Richard J. Clifford, Creation Accounts in the Ancient Near East and in the Bible, The
Catholic Biblical Quarterly Monograph Series 26, 1994, although his comments on the biblical texts include
more theologically liberal assumptions than we feel are justified or helpful. Selected texts with a minimum of
commentary are available in Bill T. Arnold and Bryan E. Beyer, eds., Readings from the Ancient Near East (Baker
Academic, 2002). A classic anthology is James B. Pritchard, ed., Ancient Near Eastern Texts Relating to the Old
Testament (Princeton University Press, 1969), although some of the translations and interpretations there have
been updated in later sources.
'The classic study is Alexander Heidel, The Babylonian Genesis (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1951 |1942)).
*For an example, see Cyrus H. Gordon, "Ancient Middle Eastern Religions: The Cultural Context, in Philip W.
Goetz et al., eds., The New Encyclopedia Britannica (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1989), 24:60-64, at 61b.
Kenneth A. Kitchen, On the Reliability of the Old Testament (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans Publishing Company, 2003),
425, says, Most Assyriologists have long since rejected the idea of any direct link between Gen, 1-I1 and Enuma
Elish." Millard, "New Babylonian 'Genesis' Story," 4, summarizes some of the reasons for this new attitude. (Mil-
lard's title, "A New Babylonian "Genesis' Story, refers to Heidel's earlier book, giving Millard's view that Atrahasis
is a more likely context for Genesis.)
SW. G. Lambert, "A New Look at the Babylonian Background of Genesis, Journal of Theological Studies n.s. 16:2
(1965): 291.
'On these points see C. John Collins, Genesis 1-4: A Linguistic, Literary, and Theological Commentary (P and R
Publishing, 2005), 44-45, nn. 15-16, drawing on linguistic work by Heidel and more recently by David Tsumura.
'Eg, William H. Shea, "Adam in Ancient Mesopotamian Traditions," Andrews University Seminary Studies 15, 1
(1977): 27-41.
"See Richard Hess, "Adam," in T. Desmond Alexander and David W. Baker, eds, Dictionary of the Old Testament:
Pentateuch (Downers Grove, IL: Inter Varsity Press, 2003), 2la.
*See William W. Hallo, "Adapa Reconsidered: Life and Death in Contextual Perspective" Scriptura 87 (2004): 272.
UNIT5


<!-- page-11 -->

'Heidel, Babylonian Genesis, 148; Pritchard, ed., Ancient Near Eastern Texts, 101.
"Stephanie Dalley, ed., Myths from Mesopotamia: Creation, the Flood, Gilgamesh, and Others, rev. ed. (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2000), 184. Question mark in the original.
"A point acknowledged by Shea, "Adam in Ancient Mesopotamian Traditions": "the Sumerians believed that Alulim
and Adapa belonged to the first significant generation of mankind" (36).
'Giorgio Bucellati, Adapa, Genesis, and the Notion of Faith, Ugarit-Forschungen 5 (1973): 63. Although Buccellati
compares Adam and Adapa, he makes no claim of any direct dependence.
'Niels-Erik Andreasen, "Adam and Adapa: Two Anthropological Characters? Andrews University Seminary Stud-
ies 19, 3 (1981), 179-94, is more cautious than Shea's article, though he still supports it. He is more aware of the
differences between the two figures than Shea seems to be. He sees them as two representations of the same
actor, which we do not; but he makes the interesting suggestion that "Adam and Adapa represent two different
characterizations of human nature" (194). But we prefer to say that, if there is any real connection between the
two stories, the two give different analyses of the human situation.
'Samuel N. Kramer, "The 'Babel of Tongues: A Sumerian Version, Journal of the American Oriental Society 88, 1
(Jan.-Mar., 1968), 108-111.
1 Berndt Alster, 1973 "An Aspect of'Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta." Revue d'assyriologie et d'archéologieorientale67,101-
10,translatedin .A.Black, G.Cunningham,E. Fluckiger-Hawker,E. Robson, and G. lyomi, The Electronic Text Corpus
of Sumerian Literature (http://www- etcsl.orient.ox.ac.uk/), Oxford 1998-. Enmerkar and the lord of Aratta:
translation, http://etcsl.orinst.ox.ac.uk/section1/tr1823.htm, lines 134-55, retrieved 9/22/2011.
"CE. W. G. Lambert and A. R. Millard, Atra-hasis: The Babylonian Story of the Flood (Winona Lake, IN: Eisenbrauns,
1999), 18: "From Sumerian literature to Berossus it is everywhere assumed that the human race was at first and
naturally barbarous. Civilization was a gift of the gods, and that is the way to understand kingship coming down
from heaven [as in the Sumerian King List]. The gods gave it as an institution for regulating society."
1 Keith Dickson, "Enki and Ninhursag: The Trickster in Paradise, Journal of Near Eastern Studies 66, 1 January
2007): 1-32, esp. 4-6; Clifford, Creation Accounts, 35, n. 52.
"Unfortunately, many evangelical scholars run afoul with this one-sided approach also. For example, John Walton,
The Lost World of Genesis One: Ancient Cosmology and the Origins Debate (Downers Grove, IL: Inter Varsity Press,
2009), admits (p. 104): "The view presented in this book has emphasized the similarities between the ways the
Israelites thought and the ideas reflected in the ancient world, rather than the differences" (though Walton himself
is well aware of these differences). That is, Walton's approach does not allow an Israelite author (who may or may
not represent the ways the rest of the Israelites thought to challenge the ideas found in other peoples. Only by
attending to the Hebrew text, to reflections on it in the rest of the Bible, and to the differences with neighboring
cultures, do we actually see what specific message the biblical writer had.
*Pritchard, Ancient Near Eastern Texts, 5.
"Clifford, Creation Accounts, 104-5, 114; Wayne Horowitz, Mesopotamian Cosmic Geography, 2nd printing with
corrections and addenda (Winona Lake, IN: Eisenbrauns, 1998, 2011), 335.
22Clifford, Creation Accounts, 105.
2 Barbara Watterson, Gods of Ancient Egypt (Godalming, Surrey, UK: Bramley Books Limited, 1996), 191.
'Cyrus H. Gordon, "Khnum and El," in Scripta Hierosolymitana: Egyptological Studies, ed. Sarah Israelit- Groll, vol.
28 (Jerusalem: Magnes Press, 1982), 208.
2KAR 4, cf. Clifford, Creation Accounts, 51.
26"Praise of the Pickax," cf. Clifford, Creation Accounts, 31.
27For a more detailed discussion, see Appendix One in C. John Collins, Did Adam and Eve Really Exist? Who They
Were and Why You Should Care (Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2011).
2Ibid.
2°See Enki and Ninmah, who create disabled people while drunk. Clifford, Creation Accounts, 39-42.
°Cf. Clifford, Creation Accounts, 98. It is important here to distinguish a creation account from the early human
history that may follow. As previously noted, many Assyriologists recognize some prehistorical value to the king
lists and deluge story, but these differ from the stories that relate to the construction of the world itself.
*Walton makes this comment in Lost World, 15: "Genesis... represents what the Israelites truly believed about how
the world got to be how it is and how it works, though it is not presented as their own ideas, but as revelation from
God" This could be taken to imply that Walton views Genesis simply as what ancient Israel believed about their
origins and history, which they present as revelation from God, though it may or may not be. A bit later he asserts
(19): "Through the entire Bible, there is not a single instance in which God revealed to Israel a science beyond their
own culture. No passage offers a scientific perspective that was not common to the Old World science of antiquity?"
But surely Walton would agree that God could reveal some details of human origins and pre-history to ancient
Israel, and do so in a way that also conveys truth to them and to us today? If early Genesis is nothing but borrowed
myths, why trust any of its spiritual claims?
"CREATION ACCOUNTS AND ANCIENT NEAR EASTERN
RELIGIONS" DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
How would you counter the claim that the ancient Israelites borrowed the creation
stories and beliefs of their neighbors?
2. What are some of the supposed parallels between Genesis and the Babylonian epic
Enuma Elish?
What are some similarities and differences between "Adam" in Genesis and "Adapa"
in the Adapa Epic?


<!-- page-12 -->

"CREATION ACCOUNTS AND ANCIENT NEAR EASTERN RELIGIONS" DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
What are some details of creation and early human history found in Genesis that
appear in other creation stories?
Chapter 5 Key Points
Key Questions:
1. What is a
metanarrative?
2. What is the biblical
metanarrative?
3. How is the biblical
metanarrative
different than other
metanarratives?
4. What sets the biblical
creation story apart
from other creation
stories?
5. Why do so many ancient cultures have creation accounts?
Key Terms:
1. Agnosticism
2. Anthropology
3. Asceticism
4. Astrology
5. Atheism
6. Cosmology
7. Deism
8. Gnosticism
9. Historical Context
10. Historical Narrative
11. /mago Dei
12. Immanent
13. Literary Context
14. Materialism
15. Metanarrative
16. Naturalism
17. Nihilism
18. Panentheism
19. Pantheism
20. Polytheism
21. Theological
Context
22. Transcendent
Key Verses:
1. Genesis 1:26-27
2. Genesis 1:28-31
3. Genesis 2:18-25
4. Psalm 8
5. Romans 1:18-23
Key Players:
1. Jean-François Lyotard
2. Voltaire
*Short answer or essay question on the exam


<!-- page-13 -->

CHAPTER 5 ASSIGNMENT
Answer the following questions with at least one paragraph.
1. What does it mean to call the Bible a story?
2. What are some reasons, both in and outside of Scripture, for believing that the Bible
is a metanarrative and reading it as such?
3. How does understanding the Bible as a narrative help us to avoid or resolve certain
theological difficulties?
4. What are some ways in which the Bible's revelation of God in Genesis differ from or
challenge other religions' portrayals of their god or gods?
Other potential questions:
• How does thinking of the Bible as a metanarrative change how you read it, as opposed to thinking
of it as an instruction manual or a list of frequently asked questions?
• How do you think the creation account of Genesis would have sounded to the Hebrews who first
heard it after they left Egypt?
• What kinds of tensions have you felt in your own experiences with Christianity, and do you think
the Bible can resolve or explain it?
•HO-
