# Chapter 6

<!-- page-1 -->

UNIT
THE BIBLE: GOD'S
BIG STORY 2
CHAPTER 6 LEARNING OBJECTIVES
Students will be able to:
summarize the doctrine of original sin. [6.1]
list the events of mankind's rebellion from Genesis 3. [6.2]
define the meaning of sin. [6.2]
articulate the consequence of humanity's rebellion. [6.2]
explain what Secularists think about sin and the human condition. [6.2a]
describe why mankind is beyond self-repair. [6.2b]
discuss how God's grace ultimately overcomes sin. [6.3]
review how God uses covenants throughout Scripture. [6.3d]
list the specifics of the Abrahamic and Mosaic covenants. [6.4a-6.4b]
10. list the specifics of the Davidic covenant. [6.5]
I1. state the role the prophets played in foretelling redemption. [6.6]
12. articulate how redemption is spelled out in the gospels. (6.7a]
13. articulate how redemption was the fulfillment of prophecy. [6.7b
14. describe what the kingdom of God looks likes. [6.7c)
15. identify the role of the church in redemption. [6.8]
16. explain how God will eventually redeem all of his creation. (69]


<!-- page-2 -->

CHAPTER 6
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
5. How do Secularists view original sin and the fall? [6.2]
1. What is the doctrine of original sin? [6.1]
2. Who was the serpent in the garden of Eden? [6.2]
How would you respond to someone who says humans can fix what's wrong with us
apart from God?
3. What is the nature of sin? [6.2]
7. How did God respond to the Fall? [6.3]
4. What were the consequences of sin? [6.2]
8. What role do "covenants" play in God's dealings with humanity: [6.3]


<!-- page-3 -->

9. What are the major covenants in the Bible and how are they ultimately secured by
Jesus Christ? [6.3]
13. Why did God raise up prophets in the Old Testament? [6.6]
14. Do you think there are prophets in the world today? If so, how are their roles the
same as in biblical times? How are they different?
10. What are some distinctives of the Abrahamic covenant? [6.4]
11. What are some distinctives of the Mosaic covenant? [6.4]
15. What was the "intertestamental period" and how did it affect Israel?" [6.6]
What are some distinctives of the Davidic covenant? [6.5]
16. Who set the stage for the coming of the Messiah? [6.7]


<!-- page-4 -->

17. In addition to the prophecies mentioned above, see how many other references to
fulfilled prophecies in the gospels you can recall.
21. Where is the focal point of the new creation? [6.9]
18. What is the "gospel"? [6.8]
19. What is the "church"? [6.8]
20. Do today's Christians have a place in the biblical metanarrative? [6.8]


<!-- page-5 -->

THE COVENANTS READING
Today's readings deal with the four most famous covenants God made with humanity.
1. Abrahamic Covenant: God's promise that Abraham's descendants would grow
into a great nation. This covenant is unconditional. God will fulfill it regardless
of Abraham or his descendants' obedience.
2. Mosaic Covenant: God's promise to establish the nation of Israel if they agreed
to follow him. This covenant is conditional. God would do certain things as long
as Israel followed through with their end of the deal.
3. Davidic Covenant: God's promise to David that his descendant will rule an ev-
erlasting kingdom. This covenant is fulfilled in Christ, who will reign as David's
4. New Covenant: God's promise to the world. This covenant extends to the whole
world due to Christ's sacrifice, which enables him to be the mediator of this New
Covenants are important as moments in history when God makes specific promises. Cov-
enants also reveal God's character and his heart for the world. As you read through these
passages, ask yourself what each of these covenants teaches you about God.
Read Genesis 15; Exodus 19-24; 2 Samuel 7; Jeremiah 31:31-40;
and Hebrews 9 in whatever Bible translation you prefer.
THE COVENANTS DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. What is a covenant and what role does it play in how God deals with humanity?
2. What are the specifics of the Abrahamic Covenant? Is it still in effect today?
3. What are the specifics of the Mosaic Covenant? Is it still in effect today?
-. -


<!-- page-6 -->

THE COVENANTS DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
4. What are the specifics of the Davidic Covenant? Is it still in effect today?
"THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN BIBLICAL
ARTIFACTS AND EVIDENCE" VIDEO
J. Warner Wallace addresses the objections of Bible scholar Bart Ehrman, who attended
leading Christian colleges and studied under renowned Christian scholars but now
rejects the inspiration and inerrancy of Scripture. Wallace agrees with Erman's claim
that there are variations in the text but shows why these dont really matter.
Wallace points out the importance of distinguishing between artifacts and evidence and
gives clear criteria for separating the two. He explains how artifacts (variant readings)
wound up in the Bible and outlines a reliable process to get back to the inerrant originals.
5. What are the specifics of the New Covenant? Is it still in effect today?
To access this video, go to www.summitu.com/utf and enter the passcode found in the
back of your manual.


<!-- page-7 -->

"THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN BIBLICAL ARTIFACTS AND
EVIDENCE" VIDEO OUTLINE
Key Question: How can we trust a Bible that's riddled with errors and variant readings?
"There are more variations in our manuscripts than there are words in the New
Testament." (Bart Ehrman)
1. Wallace agrees with Ehrman's claim but shows why these don't really matter. The key
is to distinguish between artifacts that can be disregarded and evidence that confirms
the original text.
How to Tell the Difference between Artifacts and Evidence
1. Rope in everything so as not to miss anything.
2. Identify what appeared late in the scene and disregard.
3. Recognize simple differences in character.
4. Look for an
5. See what happens if you include it.
artifacts in the Bible were due to human error.
_ artifacts in the Bible were made by scribes who were
• trying to correspond with known truth (e.g., 1 John 5:7);
• trying to complement what's already known (e.g., Acts 15:33-34); or
• trying to clarify something that's fuzzy (e.g., John 5:2-4).
The number of variations doesn't matter as long as we have a large body of texts to
compare to each other. By doing so, we can separate artifacts from evidence by using
the process described above.
Identifying the differences is only half the work; we have to _
them.
How to Deal with Variations in the Text
• Keep in mind that a witness can be wrong about a detail and still be reliable.
• Witnesses might see the same event differently, and their testimony will vary.
_ confirm the original intent of a verse.
• The students of the original disciples wrote what they had been taught. Their let-
ters reproduce what's in Scripture. Everything taught in the Gospels and epistles
is quoted in these outside texts.
We can trust the original manuscripts were inerrant (without error) because we can
prove the current documents are reliable.
In the end it's not an evidence issue; i's an investigator issue. What you want to find in
the evidence, you will find, despite what might objectively be there.
"THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN BIBLICAL ARTIFACTS AND
EVIDENCE" DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
Given the thousands of variants in the text and the amount of time between the
originals and the copies we have, how can we trust the Bible?
2. What's the difference between artifacts and evidence, and why is it important?
How can we weed out variants and unnecessary artifacts to get to the original text
of Scripture?


<!-- page-8 -->

"THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN BIBLICAL ARTIFACTS AND EVIDENCE" DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
4. Why did some scribes make deliberate changes in the texts they were copying?
Chapter 6 Key Points
Key Questions:
1. What were the
consequences of the
fall?
2. What is God's plan for
redemption?
3. How is God redeeming
his creation today?
5. What would we be left with if we threw out all the verses in the New Testament that
had variants or scribal errors?
Key Terms:
1. Covenant
2. Doctrine of Original
Sin*
3. Essenes
4. Gospel
5. Hellenization
6. Horizontal Commands
7. Intertestamental
Period
8. Pharisees
9. Protoevangelium
10. Sadducees
11. Vertical
Commands
12. Zealots
Key Verses:
1. Genesis 3:14-19
2. Genesis 3:15
3. Genesis 12:3
4. 2 Corinthians 5:1-11
5.1 Peter 2:9-10
Key Players:
1. Erich Fromm
2. Abraham Maslow
3. Cornelius Plantinga
4. Carl Rogers
*Short answer or essay question on the exam


<!-- page-9 -->

CHAPTER 6 ASSIGNMENT
Answer the following questions with at least one paragraph.
1. Contrast the biblical account of sin and the fall with Secularism's view.
2. What is a covenant in the biblical context?
3. Summarize the Creation, Abrahamic, Mosaic, and Davidic covenants.
4. How is Christ the ultimate fulfillment of each of the covenants mentioned in the
chapter?
Other potential questions:
• In what contexts have you encountered Jeremiah 29:10-14, and how is it often misquoted?
• How is grace evident in Old Testament covenants that include laws and require obedience?
• Do you think that the covenants of the Old Testament are fundamentally similar to the new
covenant, or is there a fundamental difference between the Old Testament and the New?
UNIT6
