# Chapter 10

<!-- page-1 -->

Is GOD CHRISTIAN?
CHAPTER 10 LEARNING OBJECTIVES
Students will be able to:
1. identify whether Christianity is culturally dependent or independently true. [10.1]
give examples of evidence for God that is clearly seen through general
revelation. [10.2]
3. summarize the cosmological argument for God's existence. [10.3]
4. summarize the Kalam cosmological argument for God's existence. [10.4]
5. summarize the design argument for God's existence. [10,5,
6. summarize the moral argument for God's existence. 106]
7. explain how prescriptive religious pluralism argues against the Bibles universal
truth. [10.7a]
8. explain how Postmodernism argues against the Bible's universal truth. [10.7b-c]
9. describe why Christians should share Christianity with others. (10,8)


<!-- page-2 -->

CHAPTER 10
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. What things can be known about God through general revelation? [10.2]
How does the "cosmological argument" point to the existence of God? [10.3]
How does the "Kalam cosmological argument" explain the existence of the universe?
[10.4]
4. What discoveries have given the Kalam cosmological argument new credibility? [10.4]
What is the main objection to the cosmological argument? 104)
How does the "design argument" explain the universe? [10.5]
7. What's the difference between the Grand Canyon and Mount Rushmore? [10.5]
8. What is "specified complexity" and how does it manifest itself? [10.5]


<!-- page-3 -->

9. How does "fine-tuning" support intelligent design? [10.5]
10. How does our "privileged planet" support intelligent design? [10.5]
11. How does "biological information" support intelligent design? [10.5]
12. How does the "multiverse theory" attempt to do away with intelligent design? [10.5]
13. How does "the blind watchmaker" attempt to do away with intelligent design? [10.5]
14. What is the "moral argument" for God's existence? [10.6]
15. Can evolution adequately explain objective moral law? [10.6]
16. Are moral values objectively real or morally relative? [10.6]


<!-- page-4 -->

17. Can atheists live good lives without believing in God? [10.6]
18. What is "religious pluralism"? [10.7]
19. Who was John Hick and what idea did he develop? [10.7]
20. Can religion be judged true or false based on the behavior of its followers? [10.7]
21. Who was Jacques Derrida and what idea did he develop? [10.7]
22. What is "cultural imperialism"? [10.7]
23. Is God a Christian? [10.8]


<!-- page-5 -->

"Is RELIGION A POISON OR CURE?" DEBATE CLIP
Today's gecionment comes from 2007 debate between Christian apologist Alister Mc-
Grath and tell known atheist Christopher Hitchens. The full debate discusses whether
Christianity is a poison or a cure. However, we'll focus on a thirteen-minute excerpt from
Hitchens's opening statement where he asserts that it's impossible for Christianity to be
both moral and true. He contends Christianity is utterly immoral and false.
This excerpt includes many contentions atheists have with Christianitv. After you listen.
decide how you would defend the faith against each of Hitchens's arguments.
Georget mil
To access this video, go to www.summitu.com/utf and enter the passcode found in the back
of your manual.
"TS RELIGION A POISON OR CURE?" DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
How would you answer Christopher Hitchens's claim that the death of Jesus for our
sins is immoral on the grounds that it is "scapegoating"
2. Why does Hitchens see it as illogical and immoral to think someone can pay for
someone else's sins? Why do Christians see it as their only hope?
Hitchens sees Christianity as totalitarian because he says, "I'm told I have to have a
share in this sacrifice, even though it took place long before I was born. I have no say
in it happening. I wasn't consulted about it. ... I am born in a celestial dictatorship
in which I could not have had any hand in choosing? One of his contentions with
Christianity is that humanity doesn't have a choice in the matter. Is that a good reason
for rejecting Christianity? Why or why not?


<!-- page-6 -->

"Is RELIGION A POISON OR CURE?" DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
The concept of hell and everlasting punishment is absolutely immoral to Hitchens
adman erd Scripture present the idea of divine punishment?
"THE CASE FOR GOD'S EXISTENCE" VIDEO
Inductive reasoning involves evidence and explanations. I. Warner Wallace lists eight
pieces of evidence that point to the existence of God and explores the argument: the
there must be an outside influence.
universe had a beginning; natural causes can't explain the beginning of the universe:
Wallace makes the case for the universe being created not by impersonal forces but by a
personal being. He looks at evidence for God's existence from cosmology—the cosmo-
logical argument—-which includes deductions from (1) the principles of causality (2)
the origin of time, space, and matter, and (3) the second law of thermodynamics. He
concludes with Scripture affirming a personal creator.
Hitchens argues that if Christianity is true, God must have watched the pain
and heartache of humanity for many thousands of years before finally providing
redemption. Hitchens states, "If [this] was true. It would have two further implications.
It would have to mean that the designer of this plan was unbelievably lazy and inept,
or unbelievably calloused, and cruel, and indifferent, and capricious." How would
you respond to these assertions?
To access this video, go to www.summitu.com/utf and enter the passcode found in the back
of your manual.
"THE CASE FOR GOD's EXISTENCE" VIDEO OUTLINE
Using
reasoning involves evidence and explanations. There are
eight pieces of evidence that point to the existence of God.
Evidence Pointing to the Existence of God
1. The universe had a
2. The universe appears to be fine-tuned.
3. Life emerged from nonlife.
4. Biological organisms display attributes of design.


<!-- page-7 -->

"THE CASE FOR GOD'S EXISTENCE" VIDEO OUTLINE
5. Immaterial consciousness emerged from nonconsciousness.
6. Humans are "free agents" in a "cause and effect" world.
Transcendent, objective moral truths exist.
8. The enduring presence of evil and injustice remains.
Explanatory Possibilities
• Unguided natural forces "inside the room" acted on one another.
• A supernatural force "outside the room" designed and created.
The universe had a beginning that natural causes cant explain. Therefore, there must be
an outside influence (i.e., God).
Evidence for God's Existence from Cosmology (Cosmological Argument)
• The universe has a beginning.
• Anything that has a beginning must have been caused by something else.
• Therefore, the universe must have a cause.
• That cause must be eternal and uncaused.
• The cause is
Big Bang Theory (Everything Came from Nothing)
• This doesn't mean accepting the theory of _
• This doesn't suggest the age of the universe.
Big Bang Evidence
• Second law of thermodynamics-things wear out over time
• Expansion of the universe-red shift
• Radiation echo-background noise
• Philosophy of infinite regress-without a_
there is no today
How do we know the cause of the beginning was God? The cause of the universe is
• uncaused;
• all powerful; and
• personal.
If the cause of the universe is
, it could choose to start something
that didn't exist before. The cause of the universe has the ability to decide, which is an
attribute of personhood.
Scripture affirms the cosmological argument: Psalm 102:25, 26; Isaiah 45:12; Genesis
1:1; 1 Corinthians 2:6-7.
"THE CASE FOR GOD'S EXISTENCE" DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
What role does inductive reasoning play in determining the case for God's existence
If we can prove the universe had a beginning, how does that prove the existence of God?
3. What are the alternatives to the universe having a beginning and a beginner?
-a -


<!-- page-8 -->

"THE CASE FOR GOD'S EXISTENCE" DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
4. What is the big bang theory?
5. If we agree the universe had a beginning, how do we know the cause of that beginning
was the personal God of the Bible?
Chapter 10 Key Points
Key Questions:
1. What is the evidence
for God's existence?
2. Can religion
communicate truth?
3. Is God Christian?
Key Terms:
1. Cosmology
2. Cultural Imperialism
3. Death of God Theology
4. Deconstruction
5. Descriptive Religious
Pluralism
6. Design Argument
7. General Revelation
8. Hubble's Law
9. Intelligent Design
10. Kalam
Cosmological
Argument*
11. Modernism
12. Moral Argument*
13. Moral Relativism
14. Multiverse Theory
15. Objective Morality
16. Prescriptive
Religious Pluralism
17. Postmodernism
18. Red Shift
19. Religious Pluralism
20. Second Law of
Thermodynamics*
21. Specified
Complexity
Key Verses:
1. Romans 1:19-20
2. Romans 2:14-15
3. Psalm 19:1
Key Players:
1. Aristotle
2. Richard Dawkins
3. Jacques Derrida
4. John Hick
5. Edwin Hubble
6. John A. T. Robinson
7. Bishop Desmond Tutu
*Short answer or essay question on the exam


<!-- page-9 -->

CHAPTER 10 ASSIGNMENT
Answer the following questions with at least one paragraph.
1. Describe either the cosmological argument or the Kalam cosmological argument.
2. What is the design argument and what are the three specific ways that specified
complexity is evident in the universe?
3. What is the moral argument for the existence of God?
4. What are some objections to the moral argument and what are some weaknesses in
these objections?
Other potential questions:
• How would you respond to claims that religious belief is culturally determined?
• How would you respond to postmodern ideas and how much do you think postmodernism
challenges or contradicts Christianity? Is it any more or less compatible with the Bible than other
kinds of modern secular thought that put more faith in science and human reason?
• What do you think about using scientific discoveries, which can change with time, to prove the
existence of God? What happens when scientific ideas change again?
