# Chapter 11

<!-- page-1 -->

UNIT-
SUPERNATURAL GOOD
AND EVIL
CHAPTER 11 LEARNING OBJECTIVES
Students will be able to:
1. explain why Christianity entails a supernatural reality. [11.1]
2. describe what miracles are and their purpose. [11.2]
3. identify the materialistic and naturalistic challenges to the supernatural. [11.2]
4. describe how to respond to Hume's arguments against miracles. [11.3a]
5. describe how materialism is an inadequate explanation for reality. [11.3b]
6. describe how dualism accounts for a supernatural existence. (11.3c)
7. describe how near-death experiences challenge the assumptions of
naturalism. (11.3d)
8. summarize how the resurrection of Christ is evidence for the
supernatural. [11.4]
9. name the minimal facts for defending the resurrection. (11.5,
10. list other arguments for defending the resurrection. [11.6]
11. describe evidence for the existence of supernatural evil. [11.7]
12. explain how Jesus over came supernatural evil. [11.7]
13. give an example of how supernatural evil manifests itself today: [11.8]
CREATION CARE


<!-- page-2 -->

CHAPTER 11
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. What impact did the "Age of Enlightenment" have on Christianity? [11.1]
5. What were David Hume's arguments against miracles? (11.2
6. What's the flaw in Hume's "in principle" argument against miracles? [11.3]
2. Why does the Bible include stories of the miraculous? [11.1]
7. What are the flaws in Hume's "in fact" arguments against miracles? [11.3]
3. What role do miracles play in Christianity? [11.2]
4. Why does the "scientific mindset" reject the supernatural? [11.2]
8. What is the flaw in the scientific argument against miracles? [11.3]


<!-- page-3 -->

9. What limitations does materialism/naturalism have in explaining reality? [11.3]
10. Is reality derived from one substance or two? [11.3]
11. How do near death experiences challenge materialism/naturalism? [11.3]
12. Do you believe in near death experiences? What do they think happens in an NDE?
Why do different people see different things? Why are there such diverse accounts
of what heaven is like?
13. What basis is there for accepting the Bible and its supernatural worldview? [11.4]
14. What basis is there for accepting the resurrection of Jesus? [11.4]
15. What is the "minimal facts approach" to proving the resurrection of Jesus? [11.5]
16. What other arguments are there for the resurrection of Jesus? [11.6])


<!-- page-4 -->

CHAPTER I1 DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
17. What does the Bible say about supernatural evil? [11.7]
21. Do you think a person can be demon possessed today? What would be the signs of
possession? How should cases of possession be handled?
18. How is Satan portrayed in the New Testament? [11.8]
22. What steps can Christians take to defeat evil in our lives? [11.10]
19. What gospel stories illustrate Jesus's power over Satan? [11.8]
20. How is supernatural evil manifested today? [11.9]
UNIT I


<!-- page-5 -->

"MIRACLES" VIDEO CLIPS
Tohn Lennox is professor of mathematics at the University of Oxtord. He spoke n
miracles at Harvard in 2012. He begins with the most basic question of whether there
is a Supreme Being or a supernatural realm at all. He then dispels the myths that sci-
ence and belief in God are incompatible or that science is the only way to truth. He also
clarifies that he isn't talking about a God of the gaps but the "God of the whole show"
Lennox goes on to demonstrate that without evidence that a system is totally, causally
closed you cannot argue against miracles. Indeed, there is nothing in the laws of nature
that preclude miracles, but there is abundant evidence in science, history, and personal
experience that point to their reality.
• VERTEAS PO
To access these videos, go to www.summitu.com/utf and enter the passcode found in the
back of your manual.
What is the question we must first answer before a discussion of miracles is even
2. How does a worldview affect whether people believe in miracles or not?
3. How would you answer the assertion that God and science are incompatible?


<!-- page-6 -->

What the "God of the gaps" and how is it used as an argument against theism?
"EVIDENCE FOR THE RESURRECTION" VIDEO
Frank Turek answers two key questions: "Why are there miracles?" and "Is the New
Testament true?" He lists six kinds of testimony that underscore the veracity of the New
Testament: early, eyewitness, embarrassing, excruciating, expected, and extra biblical
amples and shows why these wouldn't be found in a man-made account. He also points
out how the beliefs of the apostles changed after the resurrection, which is evidence that
they had been changed by the resurrection of Jesus Christ.
5. Can the laws of nature ever be broken?
To access this video, go to www.summitu.com/utf and enter the passcode found in the back
of your manual.
UNIT II


<!-- page-7 -->

"EVIDENCE FOR THE RESURRECTION" VIDEO OUTLINE
Why Are There Miracles in the Bible?
There are about
miracles in the Bible performed mostly in the time
between Abraham and Jesus. The main concentration of miracles is during the times of
• Moses;
• Elijah and Elisha; and
• Jesus and the apostles.
Miracles mark those who speak for God. Miracles confirm the message. Signs confirm
the sermon.
What is the greatest miracle in the Bible?
. If that verse is true,
everything else is at least possible.
Is the New Testament True?
Six Es-evidence the New Testament is true:
1. Early testimony
testimony
Embarrassing testimony
4. Excruciating testimony
5. Expected testimony
testimony
Embarrassing Testimony
If there's something embarrassing to the authors, it's probably true. The New Testament
includes embarrassing details about the _
_ and embarrassing
details about Jesus himself.
Excruciating Testimony
If those who were eyewitnesses to the story were tortured and crucified for their test-
mony, they must have believed it was true. The contrast in the disciples behavior before
and after the resurrection shows it was a
event.
What did the New Testament writers have to gain by making up a new religion? They had
every motive to say the resurrection did not happen. Why would they die for a known lie?
The New Testament Is Historically Reliable
• It is fact, not fiction.
• If it said Jesus said it, Jesus really said it.
• If it said Jesus did it, Jesus really did it.
- X-
UNIT I1
"EVIDENCE FOR THE RESURRECTION" DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
Why are there miracles in the Bible?
2. What are the six Es that point to the New Testament being true?
3. How does "embarrassing evidence" point to the truthfulness of the New Testament?


<!-- page-8 -->

"EVIDENCE FOR THE RESURRECTION" DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
4. How does "excruciating evidence" point to the truthfulness of the New Testament
5. How did the "impact event" of the resurrection change the early disciples?
Chapter 11 Key Points
Key Questions:
1. What are miracles?
2. How do we respond
to the challenges
of materialism and
naturalism?
3. How do we defend the
existence of miracles
and the resurrection?
4. What does the
Bible teach about
supernatural evil!
Key Terms:
1. Age of Enlightenment
2. Dualism
3. Materialism
4. Mind/Body Dualism
5. Minimal Facts
Approach
6. Miracle
7. Monism
8. Naturalism
9. Pantheism
10. Scientific Method
Key Verses:
1. 1 Corinthians 15:3-8
2. 1 Corinthians 15:12-19
Key Players:
1. David Hume
2. Gary Habermas
3. Josephus
4. Tacitus
Key Works:
1. The Annals and The
Histories by Tacitus
2. Antiquities of the Jews
by Josephus
3. The Case for the
Resurrection of Jesus by
Habermas and Licona
4. The Life and Morals of
Jesus of Nazareth by
Thomas Jefferson
5. Mind and Cosmos by
Thomas Nagel
6. There Is a God by
Anthony Flew
Short answer or essay question on the exam
UNIT II


<!-- page-9 -->

CHAPTER 11 ASSIGNMENT
Answer the following questions with at least one paragraph.
1. Explain the philosophical ideas behind materialism and naturalism.
2. What arguments did David Hume make against miracles?
3. What are the major flaws with Hume's arguments?
4. What is the "minimal facts approach" to proving the resurrection and what are its
key pieces of evidence?
Other potential questions:
• Do you believe that miracles or other supernatural occurrences happen today? Why or why not?
• How do you explain accounts of miracles in other religions? Are you inclined to believe or doubt
them?
• Can you give a response in your own words to the claim that science disproves miracles?
• What do you think are the strongest and weakest arguments or pieces of evidence for the
resurrection?
UNIT 11
