# Chapter 12

<!-- page-1 -->

an-ACHROMA
100x/1
Cr
a ni
ДОХ
UNIT
ISN'T CHRISTIANITY
ANTI-SCIENCE?
CHAPTER 12 LEARNING OBJECTIVES
Students will be able to:
1. define what science is and how it relates to the Bible. [12.2]
2. identify how Christianity brought about modern science. [12.3]
3. explain how science is consistent with the Christian faith. [12.4a]
4. explain how naturalistic science is based on faith. [12.4b]
5. identify ways that the Bible is consistent with scientific observation. [12.5]
6. define how theistic evolution can undermine key Christian doctrines. [12.6]
POLITICS


<!-- page-2 -->

CHAPTER 12
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. Are science and religion incompatible? [12.1]
2. Is the Bible a book of science? [12.2]
3. What role did Thomas Huxley play in creating a dichotomy between science and
religion? [12.3]
4. What's the real story of the conflict between the Catholic Church and Galileo? (123)
What was the historical relationship between Christianity and modern science? (123)
Who were some of the early scientists committed to a Christian worldview? [12.3]
7. What caused modern science to move away from Christianity? [12.3]
8. How is modern science consistent with Christianity? [12.4]


<!-- page-3 -->

9. Does faith play a role in naturalistic science? [12.4]
10. What modern scientific principles are based on a Christian worldview? [12.4]
14. What evidence is there in nature for intelligent design? [12.5]
11. What are the different Christian interpretations of Genesis 1? [12.5]
15. How does "irreducible complexity" point to intelligent design? [12.5]
12. Which of the above position do you hold? [12.5]
16. How does the existence of the universe itself point to God? [12.5]


<!-- page-4 -->

17. What is the evolutionary explanation for the beginning of life? [12.5]
21. How does the structure of DNA support the "design argument" for the orioin of
18. What did the Miller-Urey experiments prove? [12.5]
22. How does the "anthropic principle" point to intelligent design? [12.5]
19. What is the "RNA world hypothesis" for the origin of life? [12.5]
23. What limitations are there to the evolutionary explanation of life? [12.5]
20. What is the "panspermia hypothesis" for the origin of life? [12.5]
24. Is theistic evolution compatible with Scripture? [12.6]


<!-- page-5 -->

"NATURALISM" PART 1 VIDEO
Is there more to life than what we can ascertain with our senses? A naturalist doesn't
believe so. Philosopher J. P. Moreland explains the thinking behind scientific natural-
ism—the belief that the physical cosmos is all that exists—and its foundation of empiri-
cism and scientism.
Moreland then critiques thace ideas. showing them to be self-refuting and scientifically
untestable. He goes on to discredit many claims made by naturalism and notes there are
things it can't explain that can be explained if God exists.
To access this video, go to www.summitu.com/utf and enter the passcode found in the back
of your manual.
"NATURALISM" PART 1 VIDEO OUTLINE
Ontology has to do with what we believe to be
of scientific naturalism is twofold:
. The ontology
1. The physical cosmos of things in space and time is all there is. Nothing exists
outside of space and time.
2. Within the physical cosmos, everything that exists can be described by phys-
ics and chemistry.
This ontology comes from a specific epistemology-what we can know and how we can
know it. The epistemology of scientific naturalism is based on the following:
• Empiricism: only what can be tested with the five
be known.
can
• Scientism: only what can be
measured can be known.
Critique of Empiricism and Scientism
The empiricism and scientism of naturalism are self-refuting (they make themselves
false). Empiricism can't be known or tested by the five senses. Scientism is not testable
scientifically.
Two types of truth:
truth: truth that could have been false (e.g., there's
a clock in the room)
truth: truth that could not have been false
(e.g., 2+2=4)
According to naturalism, scientific truths are contingent and aposteriori-known by the
senses. But the laws of mathematics and logic are apriori-known independent of the
senses.
_ says all knowledge is based on science; but science is
based on knowledge of mathematics and logic. Mathematics and logic aren't scientific
knowledge, but they existed before science.
If scientism is true, it follows there are certain things we can't know. But there are things
) we can know apart from scientism, which means scientism is false. For example:
• The laws of mathematics and logic
• Universal moral values
• Knowledge of our own consciousness
There are things that can't be explained by empiricism and scientism that can be explained
_exists.


<!-- page-6 -->

"NATURALISM" PART 1 " DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. What is scientific naturalism and upon what is it based?
2. How can you show that the empiricism and scientism of naturalism are self-refuting?
3. How does knowledge of our own consciousness disprove scientific naturalism?
"NATURALISM" PART 1 " DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
What are the two types of truth and how do their differences undermine scientife
naturalism?
5. What are some things that can't be explained by empiricism and scientism that can
be explained if God exists?


<!-- page-7 -->

"NATURALISM" PART 2 VIDEO
In part 2 of this video, J. P. Moreland presents three detailed arguments for the universes
having a beginning and three compelling arguments for the existence of God.
Moreland asks and answers two important questions when it comes to God: "How do we
Know God exists?" and he does exist, why believe in the Christian version of theism
instead of islam or Judaism?" For Moreland, it was the supernatural, historical evidence
of the miracles of the New Testament and the resurrection of Jesus.
To access this video, go to www.summitu.com/utf and enter the passcode found in the back
of your manual.
"NATURALISM" PART 2 VIDEO OUTLINE
Three Arguments for the Universe Having a Beginning
1. The impossibility of crossing
: If the universe goes
back to infinity, for it to reach the present moment, it would have to cross an
infinite number of moments, which is impossible.
2. The universes running out of useful
-entropy: The
second law of thermodynamics says the energy in the universe is running
down. The universe will "run out of gas" at some point, which implies the
engine hasn't been running forever.
3. The
: We live in a finite universe, which means there was
an edge where the universe began to exist. This reality is affirmed by the big bang
theory.
Three Arguments for the Existence of God
1. Something that comes into existence comes from something else. It follows
that something had to bring the universe into existence. That something had
to be a spaceless, timeless, immaterial, supernatural being with the power
of free choice.
2. The origin of.
→ or irreducible complexity, is not ran-
domness. Science distinguishes among randomness, order, and information.
Information comes from an intelligent mind; it does not happen randomly.
3. There are moral absolutes. A moral absolute is a moral principle that's true
whether anyone believes it or not. If there are moral laws, they must have
come from a lawgiver who created the law and imposes its duty on humans.
How Do We Know God Exists?
knowledge by acquaintance with God
2. Propositional knowledge based on adequate reasons:
• The origin of the universe
• The origin of biological information
• The existence of absolute moral law
• The existence of equal human rights
• The existence of
Why a Christian Instead of a Muslim or a Jew?
These arguments take one to
The supernatural, historical evidence
of the miracles of the New Testament and the resurrection of Jesus take one beyond
theism to Christianity.


<!-- page-8 -->

"NATURALISM" PART 2 DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. What are three arguments for the universe having a beginning?
"NATURALISM" PART 2 DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
How does the existence of evil point to the existence of God?
2. What are three arguments for the existence of God?
5. Why would a theist choose to become a Christian instead of a Muslim or a Jew?
3. How do you know God exists?


<!-- page-9 -->

Chapter 12 Key Points
Key Questions:
1. Are science
and Christianity
compatible?
2. Are the findings of
science consistent with
what we find in the
Bible?
Key Terms:
10. Natural Selection
12. Primordial Soup
13. Progressive
Creationism*
14. RNA World
ent
Thermodynamics
16. Science
18. Theistic Evolution*
Key Verses:
1. Psalm 8:3-5
2. Colossians 1:16
3. Romans 5:12-19
Key Players:
1. Francis Bacon
2. Robert Boyle
3. Francis Collins
4. Nicolaus Copernicus
5. Charles Darwin
6. Galileo Galilei
7. Johannes Kepler
8. Isaac Newton
9. William Paley
CHAPTER 12 ASSIGNMENT
Answer the following questions with at least one paragraph.
1. How did the Christian worldview encourage the development of modern science?
2. Briefly list the various ways that explain or reconcile the biblical account of creation
with recent scientific observations. Pick two of these ways and describe what you find
most convincing and most unconvincing about them.
3. Describe the watchmaker argument and the argument from irreducible complexity.
20. Young Age
Creationism*
4. Define two of the following concepts: primordial soup, Miller-Urey experiments, RNA
world hypothesis, and panspermia. Clarify what they try to explain and what their
weaknesses are.
ent
*Short answer or essay question on the exam
Other potential questions:
• What representations or stereotypes about the relationship between religion and science have you
encountered? Why do you think it is common to perceive science and religion as irreconcilable or
contradictory?
• What do you think is the proper relationship between science and religion, and/or between faith
and reason? Should we use the Bible to explain or interpret science and should we use science to
explain parts of the Bible?
• What interpretation of the creation account in Genesis do you find most persuasive or most
compatible and why?
• Do you agree that there is a fundamental difference between macroevolution and microevolution
or does enough microevolution, over time, become macroevolution?
• How would you reconcile apparent discrepancies between a biblical account and modern findings
in science (or other fields of knowledge)?
