# Chapter 17

<!-- page-1 -->

UNIT
IF CHRISTIANITY IS TRUE,
WHY DO PEOPLE WALK
AWAY?
CHAPTER 17 LEARNING OBJECTIVES
Students will be able to:
explain why a lack of knowledge causes some Christians to abandon their
faith. [17.2]
describe why misunderstanding the nature of belief causes some Christians to
abandon their faith. [17.3]
state why conflicting commitments cause some Christians to abandon their
faith. [17.4]
articulate why living as if God doesn't exist causes some Christians to abandon
their faith. [17.5]
define how the effects of sin causes some Christians to abandon their faith. [17.6]
explain why giving in to distractions causes some Christians to abandon their
faith. [17.7]
7. describe how to deal with different types of doubts. [17.8]
8. identify how God uses the church to address unbelief. [17.9]
IF CHRISTIANITY IS TRUE, WHY DO PEOPLE WALK AWAY?


<!-- page-2 -->

CHAPTER 17
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. Why do people not find reasonable arguments for Christianity to be compelling? |17.1]
2. What do you know about the current state of Christianity in America? [17.2]
3. Why do people stop believing? [17.2]
4. What are the different "faith paths"? [17.3]
5. What is the Christian view of faith? [17.3]
6. Why do some people reject Christianity? [17.4]
7. What is "practical atheism"? [17.5]
8. What is a "culturally approved" way of life? [17.5]


<!-- page-3 -->

9. What role does heredity play in personal faith? [17.5]
13. What's the best way to deal with intellectual doubt? 178)
10. How does personal sin cause people to abandon faith? [17.6]
14. What's the best way to deal with emotional doubt? [17.8]
11. How do today's distractions diminish faith? [17.7]
15. What's the best way to deal with moral doubt? [17.8]
12. How does focused attention foster joy and a sense of meaning? [17.7]
16. Where can we find a worldview robust enough for a victorious life? [17.9]


<!-- page-4 -->

17. Why is "reconciliation" important in church life? [17.9]
21. Why is "service" important in church life? [17.9]
18. Why is "worship" important in church life? [17.9].
22. What has been your experience with the local church? Has it been positive or negative
overall? Has it answered your questions about faith or raised doubts about the reality
of Christianity? Has it provided good role models and mentors? Are you comfortable
inviting friends to church or church sponsored activities? What would you change
if you were in charge? 17.9]
19. Why is "community" important in church life? [17.9]
20. Why is "accountability" important in church life? [17.9]


<!-- page-5 -->

"ISN'T RELIGION BASED ON FAITH?" READING
In this excerpt from his book Making Sense of God: An Invitation to the Skeptical, Dr. Timothy
Keller aims to "compare the beliefs and claims of Christianity with the beliefs and claims of
the secular view, asking which one makes more sense of a complex world and human experi-
ence." To that end he exposes and challenges many of the assumptions behind atheism and
secularism, such as the belief that science is the only arbiter of what is true, or that all truth
can be proven scientifically.
Keller shows how Christians and Secularists both use reason and faith to arrive at their
view of reality and to come up with ways to live that are rational and socially acceptable. He
demonstrates that reason does not and cannot operate alone. It is always supported by faith
in certain "background beliefs" that we all have. Keller goes on to identify five seeds of doubt
and shows how we can learn to "doubt our doubts" and so disarm them.
ISN'T RELIGION BASED ON FAITH?
by Timothy Keller
Exclusive Rationality
The first set of beliefs that many secular people adopt is what I will call "exclusive
rationality." Exclusive rationality is the belief that science is the only arbiter of what
is real and factual and that we should not believe anything unless we can prove it
decisively using empirical observation. The things that we can prove are the only
things worthy of being called "truth." Everything else one might say or think lies in
the realm of unreliable human feeling and opinion. This view of reason is funda-
mental to the secular claim that religion simply cannot prove its claims that there is
a God and a supernatural realm.
In our society today this might seem like a perfectly levelheaded position. However,
many who have thought this view out to its logical conclusion have seen it to be
deeply problematic. I once knew a young man who was a devoted philosophy stu-
dent. Like his hero, the French philosopher René Descartes, he started with the only
certainty, namely, that he existed and could think. From there he tried to proceed by
piecing together a view of life that was in every part absolutely rational and proven.
To his dismay, he discovered that he could get almost nowhere. He couldn't prove
that the universe wasn't an optical illusion, a trick played on him by some demon.
He also couldn't prove by what standard something was "proven." He fell into a kind
of intense, radical agnosticism, unable to know that anything existed outside of his
own self and mind.
In her spiritual biography, Barbara Ehrenreich testifies that she arrived at the same
place as a teenager. "The whole logical enterprise began to come apart, as I suppose
it's bound to when you confront the world with only T'as a given," she wrote. When
a Christian friend chastised her for not believing in God. she responded that it was
hard enough to believe in her. "Believing in her, or even my family members for that
matter, as independent minds, took all the effort I could muster?" Both Ehrenreich
and the young man used exclusive rationality the belief that you cannot know
anything unless you can prove it empirically-and came to the conclusion that,
therefore, they could hardly know anything at all. We should not see these cases
as eccentric outliers. In many ways they foreshadowed the path of philosophical
thinking over the last century.
William Kingdon Clifford, the British mathematician and philosopher, crystallized
exclusive rationality in his famous essay "The Ethics of Belief" (1877). He wrote,
"It is wrong always, everywhere, and for anyone to believe anything on insuficient
evidence," and by "sufficient evidence" he meant empirical verification that would
convince any reasonable person who is capable of assessing it? Even though most
secular people today have never heard of Clifford, this is the operating principle
most of them use for rejecting religious belief? There are innumerable challenges
by atheists on the Internet who say to religious people, "If you want me to believe
in God, you must prove his existence."
However, this view of reason is now seen to have insurmountable problems. For
one thing, it cannot meet its own standard. According to Clifford's thesis, we should
not believe something unless we can prove it empirically. But what is the empirical
proof for that proposition?
Another problem is that few of our convictions about truth can be proven scientifically.
While we may be able to demonstrably prove to any rational person that substance X
will boil at temperature Y at elevation Z, we cannot so prove what we believe about
justice and human rights, or that people are all equal in dignity and worth, or what
we think is good and evil human behavior. If we used the same standard of evidence
on our other beliefs that many secular people use to reject belief in God, no one
would be able to justify much of anything. The only things that would be "ethical" to
believe in would be things that could be proven in a laboratory. Philosopher Peter
van Inwagen points out that the Clifford essay is often assigned in religion classes
today but never in classes on epistemology (which addresses how we know what we
know). That is because, Van Inwagen says, there are almost no teachers of philosophy
in the West who believe in Clifford's view of reason anymore?
An additional problem is that even the criteria for proof are widely contested. That
means that even statements of agnosticism can contain dedlarations of belief about
rationality. To say, for example, that you don't believe that P is proven accepts by
faith some standard of "proof" that not everyone accepts. Obviously, you cannot
prove a norm of rational proof without using it. So reason can make a case that it
is the way to truth only by appealing to itself. One philosopher writes, "That seems
to some like defending the trustworthiness of a car salesman by having him swear
that he always tells the truth?
- 34.0 -


<!-- page-6 -->

That statement is unfair. Reason is a crucial and irreplaceable way to help us weigh
competing beliefs. But it is impossible to claim that we should believe only what is
proven and that therefore, since religion can't be proven, we shouldn't embrace it. All of
us have things we believe-including things we would sacrifice and even die for-that
cannot be proven. We believe them on a combination of rational, experiential, and
social grounds. But since these beliefs cannot be proved, does this mean we ought
not to hold them, or that we can't know them to be true? We should, therefore, stop
demanding that belief in God meet a standard of universally acknowledged proof
when we don't apply that to the other commitments on which we base our lives.
"The View from Nowhere"
So reason and proof must start with faith in reason and belief in some particular
concept of proof. However, there is even more faith involved in ordinary rationality
than that. Twentieth-century thinkers such as Martin Heidegger, Maurice Merleau-
Ponty, Ludwig Wittgenstein have argued that all reasoning is based on prior faith
commitments to which one did not reason.
For example, reason depends on the faith that our cognitive senses—our eyes and
ears, our minds and memories—are not tricking us. Yet there is no noncircular way
to establish that. We cannot test their reliability without using and therefore assum-
ing their reliability. Ludwig Wittgenstein showed that it is impossible to disprove the
claim that the earth is only one hundred years old and that it came into existence
with all the marks of being old.? To explain what Wittgenstein means, consider the
movie The Matrix. Can you prove that you aren't actually in a vat somewhere with
plugs coming out of the back of your head feeding you an alternate reality? We can-
not, then, prove these fundamental premises for the operation of reasoning. We take
them on faith and are defensively dismissive of those who question those beliefs,
because we know we can't "get behind" them in order prove them.
Also, even the assertion that science and empirical evidence are the only sure ways
to understand reality assumes a view of the universe that can be known only by
faith. For example, American philosopher C. Stephen Evans writes, "Science by its
very nature is not fit to investigate whether there is more to reality than the natural
world."° Because science's baseline methodology is to always assume a natural cause
for every phenomenon, there is no experiment that could prove or disprove that there
is something beyond this material world. For example, there would be no way to
empirically prove that a miracle has occurred since a scientist would have to assume,
no matter what, that no natural cause had been discovered yet. If there actually had
truly been a supernatural miracle, modern science could not possibly discern it.
Evans argues, then, that both the statement "there is no supernatural reality beyond
this world" and the statement "there is a transcendent reality beyond this world"
are philosophical, not scientific, propositions. Neither can be empirically proven in
such a way that no rational person can doubt.! To state that there is no God or that
there is a God, then, necessarily entails faith. And so the declaration that science is
the only arbiter of truth is not itself a scientific finding. It is a belief.
All this is because deeper beliefs about the nature of being, traditionally called "on.
tology" are unavoidable and yet empirically unprovable. Indian Hindu philosophy
holds that the world is the emanation of an absolute spirit and therefore much of
realitv can be truly discerned only through contemplation. Western science assumes
instead that things exist on their own-and therefore that all material effects are
contingent on previous material causes.! If the Indian view is right, reality is no
ultimately predictable. Western science, however, assumes a closed system of natural
causes and that, therefore, given enough empirical knowledge, all things could be
Western view is right, and that's the point. As eighteenth-century philosopher David
predicted. There can be no experiment that can test out whether the Indian or the
Hume has extensively argued, our science is based on beliefs about the universe that
can't be proven or disproven. 13
In short, no one can purge him- or herself of all faith assumptions and assume an
objective, belief-free, pure openness to objective evidence. There is no "view from
nowhere."
Background Beliefs
Scientist and philosopher Michael Polanyi has argued that every individual act
of human knowing works on two levels-"focal awareness," in which the knower
gives direct attention to an observed object, and "subsidiary awareness," in which
the knower employs a host of assumptions that are tacit and not recognized as we
use them.4 Polanyi shows that all people have innumerable beliefs about reality
and relevance that come to us through bodily experience, authorities we trust, and
communities we are part of. These beliefs pass into us and we hold them as tacit
knowledge, barely conscious beliefs, and "paradigms" of reality!" So we always come
to observe anything with a "preunderstanding" of existing beliefs, expectations, and
values that controls what we see, what seems plausible, and what does not.!6
This tacit knowledge, of which we are barely aware, shapes our conscious reasoning
more than we know. Often we find certain arguments compelling mainly because of
our background beliefs, and when these beliefs shift, usually not through argument
but through experience and intuition, it makes arguments that formerly felt strong
begin to feel weak.
The problem of evil is a good case study of how background beliefs control our
supposedly strictly rational thought. James Wood and Barbara Ehrenreich explain
how the problem of evil and suffering in the world was decisive in preventing them
from believing in God as young adults. Wood, who was raised in an evangelical
Christian home, says that the cruelty and evil of actual human life would make life
pointless even if God exists." Wood calls this objection to the existence of God
"so obvious and so old, but that isn't really the case. The book of Job, for example,
presents the outrageousness of undeserved suffering as well as any ancient text, yet
in no way does it present it as an objection to the existence of God. Ancient people
were arguably much more acquainted with brutality, loss, and evil than we are. Their
literature-and the book of inh is only one example—is filled with laments abou
inexplicable suffering. Yet there is virtually no ancient thinker who reasoned from


<!-- page-7 -->

such evil that, therefore, there couldn't be a God. Why does this argument against
God's existence seem so rational and convincing today?
Charles Taylor explains why modern people are far more likely to lose their faith
over suffering than those in times past. He says it is because, culturally, our belief
and confidence in the powers of our own intellect have changed. Ancient people did
not assume that the human mind had enough wisdom to sit in judgment on how
an infinite God was disposing of things. It is only in modern times that we get "the
certainty that we have all the elements we need to carry out a trial of God"s Only
when this background belief in the sufficiency of our own reason shifted did the
presence of evil in the world seem to be an argument against the existence of God.
There is, then, a significant backdrop of faith behind modern arguments against
God on the basis of evil. It is assumed, not proven, that a God beyond our reason
could not exist-and therefore we conclude that he doesn't exist. This is, of course,
a form of begging the question. Our background beliefs set up our conscious rea-
soning to fail to find sufficient evidence for God. So the young James Wood and
Barbara Ehrenreich, brilliant young thinkers that they were, found the thesis of the
"monotheistic God" wanting. But it wasn't true that their reasoning had undermined
their faith. Instead it was that a new kind of faith, one in the power of human reason
and ability to comprehend the depths of things, had displaced an older, more self-
effacing kind of faith.
The Critique of Doubt
So even our most rigorous rational thinking is shot through with various forms of
faith. Even skeptical doubt always contains an element of belief. In his essay "The
Critique of Doubt," Michael Polanyi argues that doubt and belief are ultimately
"equivalent." Why? "The doubting of any explicit statement," he writes, "denies [one]
belief... in favor of other beliefs which are not doubted for the time being" You
can't doubt belief A except on the basis of some belief B you're believing instead at
the moment. So, for example, you cannot say, "No one can know enough to be certain
about God and religion," without assuming at that moment that you know enough
about the nature of religious knowledge to be certain about that.
Some years ago a man began attending our church. He had begun life with a general
belief in God, but he had been assailed with doubts during his college years and had
lived for decades without any religious faith. After a number of months of attending
our congregation he told me that faith in God was looking much more plausible to
him. When I asked how that was happening, he said a turning point had been a talk
he heard me give on "doubting your doubts" He said, "I had never realized there had
to be some faith under my doubts. And when I looked at the things I did believe, I
discovered I didn't have good reasons for them. When I started to examine some of
the bases for my doubts, faith in God didn't seem so hard."
What does it mean to do that? As I got to know this man and he became a friend
and eventually a member of my church, I went through the series of the things that
had triggered his first doubts. Later I discovered an atheist blogger who made an
almost identical list:
The first cause that plants the initial seed of doubt varies from person to person.
However, some of the common reasons include: meeting a real atheist and finding
that they are not the immoral, unhappy misanthropes the believer has been led to
expect; witnessing a good and faithful fellow believer suffer horribly seemingly for no
reason; witnessing institutionalized corruption or hypocrisy in the believer's religious
hierarchy; realizing the basic unfairness of the doctrines of hell and calvation; or
finding an unanswerable contradiction or error in the believer's Scriptures of choice.?
Here's how my friend doubted his doubts.
Meeting a real atheist who was not an immoral, unhappy misanthrope. This
doubt is based on the implicit belief that religious people are saved by God because
of their goodness and morality. If that is the case, then atheists by definition ought
to be bad and immoral. When he learned the biblical teaching that we are saved
only by undeserved grace, not by our moral character, he realized that there was no
reason why an atheist might not be a far better person than a Christian. The belief
under his doubt crumbled, and so his doubt went away.
Witnessing a good and faithful believer suffer horribly for no good reason. This
doubt stems from a belief that if we human beings can't discern a sufficient reason
for an act of God, then there can't be any. My friend came to realize this assumed
that, if there was an infinite God, a finite mind should be able to evaluate his mo-
tives and plans. He asked himself how reasonable it was to believe that, to have such
confidence in his own insight, and the doubt began to erode.
Witnessing corruption or hypocrisy in a religious institution. This might be the
most warranted basis for doubting the truth of a particular faith. But my friend
realized that the moral standards he was using to judge hypocritical believers came
mainly from Christianity itself. "The worst thing I could say about Christians was
that they weren't being Christian enough, but why should they be, if Christianity
wasn't true at all?"
Realizing the basic unfairness of the doctrines of hell and salvation. This doubt, my
friend said, largely came from the underlying beliefs of his culture. He had a Chinese
friend who did not believe in God, but who said that, if he existed, God certainly
would have a right to judge people as he saw fit. He then realized that his doubt about
hell was based on a very white, Western, democratic, individualistic mind-set that
most other people in the world did not share. "To insist that the universe be run like
a Western democracy was actually a very ethnocentric point of view, he told me.
An unanswerable contradiction or error in the Scripture. This doubt, my friend
said, was based on a belief that all religious believers had a naive, uncritical trust in
the Bible. "Since coming to your church 1 realize that there have been a thousand PhD
dissertations written on every single verse, and that for every contention that one
verse contradicts another or is an error, there are ten cogent counterpoints. He rightly
lost his faith that he could ever find a difficulty in the Bible that was "unanswerable."


<!-- page-8 -->

A Balance of Reason and Faith
Nothing I have said should be read as an argument for irrationality or belief based on
emotion and impulse alone. Nonrational leaps of faith, prejudice, and unquestioning
traditionalism are wrong. Theses and propositions should be rationally tested for
both inner consistency and alignment with what we know about reality. We should
have as many good reasons for what we believe as possible. However, there is both
an objective pole and a subjective pole to knowledge. The Enlightenment, following
René Descartes and John Locke, refused to see the subjective as true knowledge at all.
On the other hand, twentieth-century thinkers such as Jacques Derrida and Michel
Foucault, being sensitive to how power shapes public perceptions of truth, attacked
the idea that there was any objective pole at all. No one, they thought, should be
certain of anything.
But Michael Polanyi is convincing that both these positions— of pure objectivism
or subjectivism—are self-defeating and ultimately impossible to hold. The objectiv-
ists can't account for the host of values they unavoidably know though they can't
be proven. And the subjectivists make their own assertions meaningless and con-
tradictory. Where do they get the certainty of knowledge necessary to say that no
one has the right to be certain? Polanyis goal was "to restore the balance of our
cognitive powers."'' Social scientists have argued that we arrive at what we consider
to be "truth" through a range of methods including analytic thinking, experience,
empathy or "mentalizing, and intuition." Augustine understood that reason and
faith work always together and that reason always operates "under the guidance of
antecedent belief"23
The Christian believer is using reason and faith to get to her beliefs just as her secular
neighbor is using reason and faith to get to hers. They are both looking at the same
realities in nature and human life, and both are seeking a way to make the best sense
of them through a process that is rational, personal, intuitive, and social. Reason
does not and cannot operate alone.
Contemporary secularity, then, is not the absence of faith, but is instead based on
a whole set of beliefs, including a number of highly contestable assumptions about
the nature of proof and rationality itself. 24
This essay originally appeared as a chapter in Making Sense of God: An Invitation to the Skeptical by Timothy Keller,
copyright Penguin Publishing Group, 2016. It has been reproduced here with the permission of the publisher.
'Barbara Ehrenreich, Living with a Wild God, pp. 37 and 61.
William Kingdon Clifford, "The Ethics of Belief, Contemporary Review 29 (December 1876—May 1877): 289,
www.uta.edu/philosophy/faculty/burgess-jackson/Clifford.pdf.
"Atheist philosopher Bertrand Russell assumed it when asked what he would do it he died and found himself before
God. He answered that he would defend himself by saying, "Sir, why did you not give me better evidence?" Leo
Rosten, "Bertrand Russell and God: A Memoir, Saturday Review, (February 23, 1974): pp. 25-26.
"See Peter van Inwagen, "Quam Dilecta, in God and the Philosophers: The Reconciliation of Faith and Reason, ed.
Thomas Morris (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1994), pp. 44-47.
"There are some secularists, such as the "New Atheists" Richard Dawkins and Sam Harris, who continue to try to
apply Clifford-style exclusive rationality to all Knowledge. But they are now rare. Van Inwagen's point is that, while
most secularists have abandoned exclusive rationality as a way of knowledge in general, most of them continue to
apply it to religious belief. This is at least inconsistent, if not disingenuous
subting that pis true implies the acceptance of some not strictly indubitable framework within which P can be
mid to be., provable or not-provable." Michael Polanyi, Personal Knowledge: Toward a Post-Critical Philosophy
(New York: Harper Torchbooks, 1964), p. 274.
Michael P. Lynch, In Praise of Reason: Why Rationality Matters to Democracy (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2012)
University of Connecticut, says, "I will not defend reason with a capital R, nor the illusion that reason is vite-
velling ideological slogans at one another. Nevertheless, it is striking that Lynch, a professor of philosophy at the
free-nor that there are unfounded foundations, nor that there is a bare, unbiased 'given' in experience" (p. 5).
*See Charles Taylor, "Overcoming Epistemology, in Philosophical Arguments (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
op 1995) 1 Tres K. A. Smith makes a Christian case for the kind of knowing explained by Merleau-
MI: Wm. B. Eerdmans, 2013).
Ponty, Pierre Bourdieu, and other Continental thinkers in the first half of Imagining the Kingdom (Grand Rapids,
*This is taken from Ludwig Wigenstein, On Certainty, ed. G. E. M. Anscombe and G. H. Von Wright, trans. Denis
Paul and G. E. M. Anscombe (New York: Harper & Row, 1969), sections 83-110, pp. 12c-15.
1°C. Stephen Evans, Why Christian Faith Still Makes Sense: A Response to Contemporary Challenges (Grand Rapids
MI: Baker Academic, 2015), p. 23.
Lesslie Newbigin, The Gospel in a Pluralist Society (Grand Rapids, MI: Wm. B. Eerdmans, 1991), p. 20. For a
summary of Polanyi's thought and its application to matters of religious faith and doubt, see the first sixty-five
pages of Newbigin's book.
If someone was to counter that the "uniformity of nature"- that "if X is the cause of Y, then Y wil necessarily
exist whenever X exists" —has been proven, eighteenth-century philosopher David Hume would deny it. He
famously and powerfully argued we cannot prove that just because one thing follows another in a laboratory,
it will ever do so again. Our belief that causally the future will be like the past is a premise of faith, it cannot be
empirically demonstrated. Hume says, therefore, that inferences of cause-effect relationships aren't " determind
by reason, [so] there must be 'some principle of equal weight and authority' that leads us to make them. Hume
maintains that this principle is custom or habit. ... It is therefore custom, not reason, which determines the mind
... to suppose the future conformable to the past (Abstract 16).... Hume concludes that custom alone 'makes us
expect for the future, a similar train of events with those which have appeared in the past (EHU 5.1.6/44) Wil-
liam Edward Morris and Charlotte R. Brown, "David Hume," in The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring
2016 ed.), ed. Edward N. Zalta, http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/hume/. See also the essay "Probable Reasoning
Has No Rational Basis." "Our belief is in the uniformity of nature. By this means, our experience is able to yield
us a rich bounty of causal information, which in turn permits us to connect up the reality with which our senses
acquaint us (impressions) to the greater reality that lies beyond the purview of the senses, yet, in truth, exists only
in our imaginations in the form of vivid ideas. However, although the uniformity principle is the foundation of
all empirical reason as such, it is not itself founded on reason, demonstrative or probable." This essay is part of a
course offered by Wayne Waxman at New York University, "The History of Modern Philosophy" found at www.
nyu.edu/gsas/dept/philo/courses/modern05/Hume_on_empirical_reasoning.pdf.
Polanyi, Personal Knowledge, p. 88. Much of the material in this part of the chapter is based on Polanyi's chapters
"The Critique of Doubt" and "Commitment,, pp. 269-324.
15 "Paradigm" is the term made famous by Thomas Kuhn in Thomas S. Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions,
4'' ed. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2012). "Tradition" is the term used in Alasdair MacIntyre, After Virtue,
3"ed. (Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press, 2007). Robert Bellah defines a "tradition like this: "A
tradition is a pattern of understandings and evaluations that a community has worked out over time. Tradition is
an inherent dimension of all uman action. There is no way of getting outside of tradition altogether, thou a ve
may criticize one tradition from the point of view of another. Tradition is not used in contrast to reason. [In fact)
tradition is often an ongoing reasoned argument about the good of the community or institution whose identity
it defines" Robert Bellah, et al., Habits of the Heart: Individualism and Commitment in American Life, with a New
Preface (Oakland, CA: University of California Press, 2007), p. 336.
Martin Heidegers student Hans-Georg Gadamer, in his influential book Truth and Method, developed this idea
of our Vorurteil (iterally in German, "prejudice"). We are all unavoidably situated in cultures and communties
and times. There is no "view from nowhere" we begin with a perspective and we analyze a text by comparing its
world with our world. See Robert J. Dostal, "Introduction, in The Cambridge Companion to Gadamer, ed. Robert
1. Dostal (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2002), p. 6. Also see Fred Dallmayr, Integral Pluralism:
Beyond Culture Wars (Lexington, KY. University of Kentucky Press, 2010), p. 103-22. Many believe that Thomas
Kuhn applied Heidegger's and Gadame's hermeneutics to scientific inquiry.
James Wood. The Broken Estates Fecaucan I iterature and Belief (New York: Picador, 2010). "Life-under-God seem
a pointlessness posing as a purpose (the purpose, presumably being to love God and to be loved in return); life.
without-God seems to me also a pointlessness posing as a purpose (iobs, family, sex, and so on—all the usua
distractions). The advantage, if it can be described as one, of living in the latter state, without God, is that the


<!-- page-9 -->

false purpose has at least been invented by man, and one can strip it away to reveal the actual pointlessness" (p.
261). Ehrenreich writes that the monotheistic God "can be blamed for natural disasters and birth defects." Living
with a Wild God, P. 226.
Taylor, A Secular Age, p. 232.
"Polanyi, Personal Knowledge, p. 272.
20"Into the Clean Air," Pathos.com. no date, www.patheos.com/blogs/daylight atheism/essays/into-the-clear-
air/#sthash.LosBmEcu.dpuf.
2 Polanyi, Personal Knowledge, p. 265.
"See A. L. Jack et al., (2016) Why Do You Believe in God? Relationships Between Religious Belief, Analytic Think-
ing, Mentalizing and Moral Concern," PLoS ONE 11, no. 3 (2006): e0149989.
"Michael Polanyi, Personal Knowledge, p. 266. Polanyi claimed that Augustine had initiated postcritical philosophy
because he taught that ultimately all knowledge is a gift of God's grace. Reason works only on the basis of antecedent
faith. Nisi credideritis, non intelligetis—unless you believe you will not understand. See also p. 268.
2*The assertion that secularity is not an absence of faith and metaphysical beliefs but a different set of such beliefs
is still highly contested in popular forums, but in scholarly circles the case for this is being made with increasing
power and sophistication. To acquaint yourself with that scholarship, a good place to start is Stephen LeDrew,
The Evolution of Atheism: The Politics of a Modern Movement (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2015). LeDrew,
himself an atheist, is highly critical of the New Atheists, who in his view will not admit that their position is not
merely one of pure scientific rationality but is rather an ideology, which he defines as "a stable structure of beliefs
and attitudes that determine how knowledge is constructed and interpreted to legitimate a form of authority"
(p. 56). LeDrew agrees with the contention in this chapter that the New Atheists epistemology-its claim that
reason does not require faith in order to function—is naive. However, though he does not seem to share the
New Atheists' "naked rationality," he does share with them their "humanistic morality." LeDrew correspondingly
holds there are "Two Atheisms: Scientific and Humanistic" (p. 32). The other scholarship that LeDrew sum-
marizes and draws upon includes the following: Asad, Formations of the Secular; Terry Eagleton, Reason, Faith
and Revolution: Reflections on the God Debate (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2009) and Culture and the
Death of God (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2014): Max Horkheimer and Theodor W. Adorno, Dialectic
of Enlightenment: Philosophical Fragments, ed. Gunzelin Schmid Noerr, trans. Edmund Jephcott (Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press, 2002); Craig Calhoun et al., Rethinking Secularism (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
2011): Philip Gorski et al., The Post-Secular in Question: Religion in Contemporary Society (New York: New York
University Press, 2012); Eduardo Mendieta and Jonathan VanAntwerpen, eds., The Power of Religion in the Public
Square (New York: Columbia University Press, 2011). LeDrew also draws upon Taylor and Habermas. See Taylor,
A Secular Age, and Jürgen Habermas et al., An Awareness of What is Missing: Faith and Reason in a Post-Secular
Age (Cambridge: Polity Press, 2010); Jürgen Habermas, Between Naturalism and Religion (Cambridge: Polity,
2008) and Religion and Rationality: Essays on Reason God, and Modernity (Cambridge: Polity, 2002). It should be
noted that LeDrew is especially concerned with analyzing the "New Atheists," a strain of what he calls "scientific
atheism" that is particularly ideological and that refuses to admit that it is. Nevertheless, LeDrew's efforts to show
the historical genealogy of secularist beliefs applies to all its forms.
COMMUNITY RENEWAT
TEN'T RELICION BASED ON FAITH DISCUSSION QUESTION
1. What is exclusive rationality and why is it logically inconsistent?
How can it be shown that all reasoning is based on prior faith commitments?
3. Everyone has background beliefs. What are they and where do they come from?


<!-- page-10 -->

"ISN'T RELIGION BASED ON FAITH?" DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
4. Why are modern people more likely to lose their faith over the presence of evil and
suffering in the world than people in earlier times?
"DEALING WITH DOUBT" VIDEO
Brett Kunkle points out that doubt is a universal human experience; it's not unique to
Christians. He poses three questions for reflection: (1) What are your top three questions
for, or objections to, Christianity? (2) What are the top three hurts in your lite, resolved
or unresolved? and (3) What are the top three sins you struggle with most?
Kunkle shows how these questions reveal different kinds of doubt: intellectual doubt,
emotional doubt, and moral doubt. He then gives practical suggestions for dealing with
the different types of doubt in our own lives and in the lives of others.
5. What are some of the experiences that plant seeds of doubt in the minds of thinking
people?
To access this video, go to www.summitu.com/utf and enter the passcode found in the back
of your manual.


<!-- page-11 -->

"DEALING WITH DOUBT" VIDEO OUTLINE
Doubt is a universal human experience; i's not unique to Christians. Struggling with
doubt is okay. Even the giants in Scripture struggled with doubt (e.g., Abraham, Job,
David, Jeremiah, Peter, John the Baptist, Thomas).
Three Questions for Reflection
1. What are your top three key questions for, or objections to, Christianity?
2. What are the top three hurts in your life, resolved or unresolved?
3. What are the top three sins you struggle with most?
These areas correspond to different sources of doubt:
1. Questions Coming from Intellectual Doubt
Caused by: unanswered questions, mistaken
thinking or logic
How to deal with intellectual doubt:
, bad
• Identify your top three questions and objections.
• Get resources on these topics.
with others.
• Plug into Christian community.
How to help others struggling with intellectual doubt:
• Ask questions.
• Listen patiently.
• Use
2. Questions Coming from Emotional Doubt
Caused by: pain, depression, anxiety, broken relationships
How to deal with emotional doubt:
• Take your pain to God.
• Plug into Christian community.
• Seek Christian
How to help others struggling with emotional doubt:
• Love them.
• Listen to them.
• Don't blast them with apologetics.
"DEALING WITH DOUBT" VIDEO OUTLINE
3. Questions Coming from Moral Doubt
Caused by: personal sin, weak faith, peer pressure, lack of spiritual growth
How to deal with moral doubt:
• Confess your sins to God.
• Confess your sins to others; have them hold you accountable.
• Plug into the Christian _
How to help others struggling with moral doubt:
• Be a good friend while you wait for reality to take its toll.
• Offer them the hope of the gospel.
Apologetics seeks to remove the intellectual, emotional, and
to seeing Jesus Christ.
barriers


<!-- page-12 -->

"DEALING WITH DOUBT" DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. Doubt is a universal human experience, even for the strongest saints. Who are some
noted believers in Scripture who struggled with doubt?
2. What are your top three questions about or objections to Christianity that have cast
a shadow of doubt on your faith?
Have there been hurtful experiences in your life that have caused you to doubt God?
How can those hurts be healed?
"DEALING WITH DOUBT" DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
Are there some common seeds from which various doubt can spring?
5. What are some practical ways to deal with intellectual, emotional and moral doubt?


<!-- page-13 -->

Chapter 17 Key Points
Key Questions:
1. Why do some people
reject reasonable
arguments for
Christianity?
2. Why do some
Christians abandon
their faith?
3. How should we deal
with our doubts?
Key Terms:
1. Faith
2. Emotional doubt
3. Intellectual doubt*
4. Moral doubt*
5. Practical atheism*
Key Verses:
1. Psalm 73:21-26
2.2 Corinthians 10:3-5
CHAPTER 17 ASSIGNMENT
Answer the following questions with at least one paragraph.
1. How does the Bible talk about the relationship between having faith and having
reasons for that faith, that is, what does it say about knowing the truth?
2. What is practical atheism and what is the relationship between it and what our imagi-
nations and culture say is possible?
*chort answer or essay queston on ine exam
3. How can seemingly harmless distractions and advertisements have an effect on one's
faith or spiritual maturity?
4. How can the church help believers address moral and emotional doubts?
Other potential questions:
• If you have (or are having) a crisis of faith, are you able to face it like Sean McDowell did? Do
you have people who could encourage you to explore the truth like Sean McDowell's father
encouraged him?
• Why do you think that, if the Church is so important for dealing with doubt and encouraging
spiritual growth, so many people stop attending church?
• How many of the six "faith paths" have you experienced for yourself?
• Which cause or source of doubts do you find most damaging, whether at the individual level or for
your culture?
