# Chapter 1

<!-- page-1 (book p.1) -->

Introduction
1. Ever Been There?
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to conclude the importance of being prepared to
explain the Christian faith.
Think about what happens after you watch a great movie, hear a beautiful song, eat at
a delicious restaurant, or enter into a relationship with someone you really like. What
do you do? A natural response is to tell someone! When we experience joy, pleasure, or
satisfaction, we want others to know and share in our experience. So it is with many
people who find Jesus and commit their lives to him. Amazed by God's love and grace,
they are eager to share their newfound faith with others.
It is good and natural for a new Christian to want to share
the joy of knowing Jesus with others. Before long, however,
most new Christians will encounter difficulties sharing the
gospel. Consider some common scenarios:
Tom is trying to share his faith with Jin, a classmate. Jin
responds, "I appreciate what you're trying to say, but I just
don't see how you can believe in God. I mean, just look at all
the suffering and evil in the world! How could a good God
allow so much suffering? Why doesn't he do something about
it if he's so powerful and loving?" Tom admits that he isn't sure,
and Jin says that he's really not interested in hearing any more about Christianity until
someone can explain this problem to him.
Jack is making small talk with his coworker, Seth, when suddenly Seth says, "It seems
like life is just going to school, getting jobs, buying stuff, living our lives, and then dying.
Seems pretty meaningless. Is that all there is to it? If so, what's the point?" Jack is a
Christian and has a good understanding of the gospel, but now, he finds himself unsure
how to respond. He is somewhat embarrassed to admit he is a Christian, afraid of what
Seth will think of him. He's worried that he'll bungle his response and turn Seth against
Christianity. In the end, he decides to shrug his shoulders and say nothing, but later, he
feels guilty for not taking the opportunity to share his faith.
Rachel is a Christian who is very comfortable sharing her faith with others. At the
airport, she strikes up a conversation with Erin, the passenger sitting next to her. After
Rachel clearly and earnestly explains the gospel, Erin responds, "That's great. I'm glad you
found something that gives you peace and makes you happy. I don't go for religion much
myself, but I'm glad it works for you." Surprised, Rachel finds herself unsure of how to
carry on the conversation. So, she drops it and talks about something else.
Heather shares a Bible verse while talking
with her cousin, Nathan. He asks, "Why
do you care what the Bible says? The Bible
is filled with violence, slavery, oppression of
women, and hatred of people with opposing
views. I don't want any part of that. I mean,
Jesus is a nice guy and all that, but the idea
that he was actually God seems a bit silly,
don't you think?" Heather doesn't know what
to say. Over time, Nathan's objections to
Christianity cause her to wonder if what she
believes is really true or worth believing at all.
Brian is a new Christian excited to share
what Jesus has done in his life. One evening after soccer practice, Brian tells his friends
about his new found faith. "I've been wondering for a long time what life is all about,"
Brian says, "and I think I may have found the answer in Christianity. You see, Jesus came
to set us free from our mixed-up, sinful selves." "Ah, cool," says Liam. "Hey, did you see
CHAPTER 1 | 5


<!-- page-2 -->

??
the Eagles' game last night? They really killed it out there!" Whenever Brian tries to share
his faith with friends, they politely change the subject, baffling and discouraging Brian.
2. Purpose of This Book
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to discuss the purpose of apologetics.
If you've ever had an experience like one of these scenarios, you're not alone. Such
experiences are normal. In sharing the gospel, we may discover that people are not
nearly as interested or excited about Jesus as we are. We may find people indifferent,
unconcerned, or even hostile to Christianity. We may find ourselves confronted with
questions we feel unable to answer. We may be embarrassed to learn that we do not know
as much as we think we do. All of this can be discouraging, causing us to shy away from
sharing our faith and maybe even lose confidence in our beliefs. But we don't have to be
discouraged. We can be confident in sharing our faith. That's why this book was written.
Apologetics is the second volume in the four-part Understanding the Times series,
designed to help you understand, experience,
and live out the Christian worldview. This series
also demonstrates how Christianity stands up to
criticism, addresses other worldviews, and provides
guidance for dealing with some of the most
challenging issues in culture. Here's a brief outline
of what each book explores:
1. Foundations: This volume introduces the
foundational building blocks of the Christian
worldview. These include God (Father, Son, and
Holy Spirit), the Bible and its metanarrative or
grand storyline, what it means to love God and
neighbor, and how to practice your faith.
2. Apologetics: This volume provides guidance for defending and commending the
Christian faith to others. It also demonstrates how the Christian worldview overcomes
common objections in society today.
3. Worldviews: This volume considers the Christian worldview compared to five other
worldviews while examining the answers they each give to life's biggest questions in areas
like theology, philosophy, politics, biology, and more.
4. Culture: This final volume shows how the Christian worldview has the resources to
engage with the most challenging and controversial issues of our day and provides a model
for faithful Christian engagement with the world.
Throughout this series, we talk a lot about worldviews. A worldview is a pattern of ideas
and beliefs that helps us make sense of the world and that guides our decisions and actions. A
worldview is a particular way of seeing the world.
Just as a reliable map or GPS guides you through a complex city, a worldview is essential
for navigating the complexities of life and living purposefully in it. This series is written
from the conviction that the Christian
worldview best explains the world and helps us
live in it with meaning and purpose.
In the previous volume, Foundations,
we saw the beauty and power of the
Christian worldview. We learned about the
metanarrative of Scripture and how to read
the Bible, discovered core truths about God
and ourselves, and explored what it means
to become participants in God's story. But
what happens when we share the Christian
worldview with others? And how do we do
that? What happens when we confront hard
questions such as, "Why do evil and suffering
exist?" Or criticism such as, "Christianity
& worldviews a pattern of ideas
and beliefs that helps us make
sense of the world and that guides
our decisions and actions
is anti-science"? Or opposition such as,
"Religion is bad for the world?" What if we have doubts about the truth of Christianity? Is
that even okay?
Addressing these questions is what this second volume, Apologetics, is all about. We
hope that by the end of this course, you'll discover that Christianity provides reasonable
responses and answers to many hard questions. We also hope that if you are a Christian,
you'll be strengthened in your faith and feel equipped to confidently share the hope of
Jesus with others.
3. The Bible and the Mission of God
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to analyze how the mission of God is grounded in
the biblical metanarrative.
We'll begin our study by exploring the Bible, a book that Christians highly regard and
recognize as inspired, inerrant, and authoritative. It is an ancient book filled with unusual
ideas, strange stories, and surprising teachings
that can be hard to understand. Because of this,
some people wonder why anyone would take the
& mission
of God:
God's plan
to bless,
redeem,
and restore
creation
Bible seriously. In Chapter 2, we'll look at why
Christians believe the Bible to be God's Word,
the authoritative and trustworthy account of
God and his purposes for us and all creation.
In Chapter 3, we'll turn our attention to the
mission of God and how we spread the great
story of Scripture. The mission of God is best
described as God's plan to bless, redeem, and
restore creation.
CHAPTER 1 | 7
6 | CHAPTER 1


<!-- page-3 -->

The mission of God is grounded in the biblical metanarrative, summarized in six acts
and an interlude:
• Act 1: Creation-God created a good world where humans could dwell in harmony
with him, others, themselves, and creation. Humans are made in God's image and
given the task of ruling the earth wisely.
• Act 2: The Fall—The first human pair rebelled against God and brought sin into the
world, leading to violence, the breakdown of relationships, and death.
• Act 3: Redemption Initiated—Despite the catastrophe of sin, God refused to give
up on his world. He graciously chose Abraham's family to form the nation of Israel,
rescued Israel from slavery, and called its people to be a kingdom of priests so that
through them, all people would be blessed.
• Interlude-After they failed to be faithful to God and spent long years in exile, the
people of Israel looked for a messiah who would rescue them and establish God's
• Act 4: Redemption Accomplished—Jesus entered the world as the God-incarnate
Messiah. He announced that the kingdom of God had arrived. Living a fully human
and sinless life, Jesus died on the cross and then rose again in order to defeat sin and
death, making salvation available to all.
• Act 5: Restoration Initiated—Following Jesus' ascension to heaven, the Holy Spirit
descended and empowered the church to share the good news and be agents of
• Act 6: Restoration Accomplished—When Jesus returns, he will bring final
judgment on evil and will fully establish God's kingdom in the new heavens and
In every act of this great story, God is on a mission to bless, redeem, heal, and restore
the world he loves. Over and over, God's people failed, but God never gave up on them.
Jesus embodied the mission of God' by announcing the good news of God's reign and
giving away his life, making it possible for all people to experience reconciliation and
blessing. Ultimately, only he can bring God's mission to completion. Mission, then, is not
first and foremost something we do. It is something God does.?
Amazingly, God wants us to be a part of his mission. As Jesus' followers, we have been
commissioned and sent into the world to tell others about Jesus and show his love through
our lives. We do this in the power of the Holy Spirit. We carry on God's mission by being
a community of love, forgiveness, and grace, doing acts of compassionate service, and
telling the truth of the gospel to people both near and far.
4. The Call to Participate in the Mission of God
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to explain three aspects of God's mission that
Christians were given in the Great Commission.
Beginning in the book of Genesis, God has been calling people to participate in his
mission. He called Adam and Eve to rule wisely in his world; he called Abraham to
be a blessing to all peoples; and then, he called the nation of Israel to be a kingdom of
priests through whom his Light for the nations would come. Jesus embodied the Trinity's
mission of self-giving love. He sent disciples into the world to announce the good news,
empowered them with the Holy Spirit, and still calls Christians today to continue his
mission.
The most famous call to mission in the New Testament is the Great Commission,
which Jesus gave to his disciples with the following words:
All authority in heaven and on earth has been given to me. Go therefore and make
disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of
the Holy Spirit, teaching them to observe all that I have commanded you. And behold,
I am with you always, to the end of the age. — Matthew 28:18-20
Though these words were initially spoken to disciples in the first century, the command
extends to all believers today. These verses teach three things that help us understand our
role in God's mission.
1. Mission is grounded in the reality that all authority
in heaven and on Earth belongs to Jesus. Jesus has
defeated the powers of evil that enslaved us and rules as
the world's rightful Sovereign. As those who have received
God's grace through faith and declared allegiance to Jesus,
we have been tasked with announcing the reality that Jesus
is Lord. We go and tell others because God reigns; the
message we share is his call for repentance and his offer of
forgiveness (Luke 24:47)4
2. We go to make disciples, baptize, and teach. The
word disciple means learner or pupil. A disciple is not
someone who merely holds a certain set of beliefs. A disciple is one who follows and learns.
This means that our task is not only encouraging people to trust Jesus as Savior and Lord
(though this is essential) but making disciples and instructing them in his ways.
3. Jesus is always with us. This promise was fulfilled with the coming of the Holy Spirit,
whose presence within believers empowers them for mission and gives them the words to
Jesus commissions
the disciples,
German Bible
illustration,
AD 1010
8 | CHAPTER 1
CHAPTER 1 | 9
9 Introduction


<!-- page-4 -->

say (Luke 12:12). No matter how weak or incapable we may feel, no matter what criticism
or persecution we might face, we can be confident that the Spirit that dwelt in Jesus dwells
in us.
Given the embarrassment or rejection we might face in speaking about God, it is
tempting to leave the work to the "professionals"-pastors, missionaries, evangelists, and
apologists. Though some people have been specially gifted to announce the good news
in particular ways, we all have the privilege and responsibility of participating in God's
mission by investing our time and resources in helping others learn what it means to be a
follower of Jesus.
Yet the results of our mission endeavors are not up to us. God sends us in the power
of the Holy Spirit (Acts 1:8). God does not assign us a quota of souls to convert and
then leave us alone to get on with the task. The Holy Spirit goes with us and before us,
preparing people to hear the good news and giving us the right words to say (Matthew
10:19-20). Our job is simply to follow the Spirit's lead. So, the best thing we can do to
prepare ourselves for mission is to keep in touch with the Spirit through regular practices
like prayer, Scripture reading, and worship. As we do, the fruit of the Spirit-love, joy,
peace, and so on (Galatians 5:22-23)—will be evident in us, attracting others to the
gospel and strengthening us for mission. In Chapters 4-5, we'll consider our calling and
empowerment for mission in greater detail.
5. An Introduction to Evangelism and
Apologetics
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to differentiate between evangelism and
Evangelism and apologetics are two ways to participate in God's mission. The word
evangelism is derived from the Greek word euangelion, which means good (eu) messenger
(angelos). An evangelist is one who brings
good news. Evangelism is sharing the good
6 evangelism:
sharing the
good news
about Jesus
and inviting
people to
respond
with faith
news about Jesus and inviting people to respond
with faith.
Evangelism involves three critical pieces:
(1) a clear presentation of the gospel, (2) an
active demonstration of the gospel, and (3) a
generous invitation to respond to the gospel.
1. A clear presentation: People cannot
accept the gospel until someone
communicates it to them (Romans 10:17).
So, evangelism requires clearly sharing the good news that Jesus is Lord and that salvation
and forgiveness are available to all through him.
2. An active demonstration: Evangelism also goes beyond words. The way we live our
lives should be a witness to the reality and power of the gospel. When we imitate Jesus
with acts of love, justice, and compassion, people can experience the difference that Jesus
makes in our lives and the lives of those we help.
3. A generous invitation: Evangelism is not merely
telling people about the gospel; it also includes an
invitation to respond to the gospel. Because evangelism
can take time, people may not always respond to the
first invitation we give to trust Jesus as Savior right away.
We might first invite them to investigate the truth of the
gospel message or to read Scripture for themselves.
Some people will be ready and willing to receive
the gospel message when they hear it, but others will
• apologetics:
the art of
defending,
commending,
and translating
the Christian
faith
have doubts or other barriers to belief. This is where
apologetics comes in. The term apologetics comes from
the Greek word apologia, which originally referred to
a defense given in a court of law. Apologist Alister
McGrath offers three tasks for apologetics. First,
apologetics involves defending the Christian faith against objections and criticisms.
Apologetics also includes upholding or explaining the truth of something. Second, for
Christians, this is the work of commending the gospel: showing it to be true, beautiful, and
worthy of belief. Third, apologetics involves translating. Most people today do not know
what we mean when we use terms such as born again, sin, or justification. Part of apologetic
work is explaining these terms into words people can understand. Christian apologetics,
then, is the art of defending, commending, and translating the Christian faith.
Apologetics is complementary to evangelism. It is a kind of ground clearing to
prepare the way for someone to hear and receive the gospel message. Apologists address
the real doubts, objections, and questions that prevent people from saying yes to Jesus.
The Christian apologist tries to respond persuasively to questions such as, "How could a
good God allow suffering?" "Can science and Christianity coexist?" "What evidence is
there that Jesus actually rose from the dead?" "Does God send people to hell?" and more.
Apologetics may also be used to strengthen Christians' faith.
Apologists labor to show that Christianity is reasonable, relevant, and desirable? The
most common form of apologetics today is using intellectual arguments to defend the
faith. Though this is a necessary part of apologetics, the best apologetics go beyond reason
to address the whole person, including our experiences, emotions, and desires. Each person
is different, and there may not be a single, one-size-fits-all answers to hard questions.
Take a common question as an example: "How could a good God allow pain and
suffering?" Some people asking this will need an intellectual, reason-based response.
Others ask this question primarily because they have personally suffered. Others doubt
God's character, assuming that he must be evil if he allows such pain. Each person
requires a different response. Therefore, apologetics has as much to do with careful
listening as it does with actual arguments.
10 | CHAPTER 1
CHAPTER 1 | 11
S Introduction


<!-- page-5 -->

St. Paul fresco,
Herz Jesu Kirche,
Berlin, Germany
6. Some Misconceptions about Evangelism and
Apologetics
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to contrast ineffective evangelism and apologetics
approaches with Jesus' model for reaching sinners.
Evangelism and apologetics are important ways we actively engage in God's mission.
However, many well-meaning people throughout history have done evangelism and
apologetics in ways that have caused harm to others or made
it more difficult for them to trust Jesus. Let's consider a few
examples.
For some people, the word evangelism calls up images of angry
street preachers shouting about hell and damnation. For others,
evangelism means being confronted by Christians who use high-
pressure tactics to get them to pray a prayer. Still others are given
literature or are directed to videos, podcasts, or websites that may
misconstrue God's character and distort the gospel. Most likely,
the Christians who practice evangelism in these ways truly desire
for people to experience salvation. Yet these practices fall under the
umbrella of proselytism—that is, "whatever violates the right of the
human person ... to be free from every type of physical coercion,
moral restraint or psychological pressure which could deprive a
person or a community of freedom of judgment and responsible
choice."" In its most basic sense, proselytism refers to the attempt
to convert someone from one religion to another, which in and of
itself is not bad. However, the term has come to be associated with
evangelistic strategies that do not honor the dignity of others or
attempt to disparage their culture.
The Bible is clear that God wishes all people to be saved (2 Peter 3:9), yet he will
not force anyone to receive him. Jesus came in humility, not in overwhelming power
(Philippians 2:5-8). Jesus did not use coercion or clever sales tactics to convert anyone;
people rejected him if they chose (Luke 4:28-29, John 1:11). Though he offered warnings
about the need to repent (Matthew 4:17, Luke 13:1-9), Jesus looked on sinners with love
(Mark 10:17-27) and invited them into a relationship (Luke 19:1-10). Jesus' example must
shape faithful Christian evangelism.
Like evangelism, apologetics has sometimes acquired a bad name. One may think
of of apologists who have ready, reasonable, and witty answers to every question but
present them in arrogant, condescending, or rude ways. Though they want people to see
the truth of Christianity, they fail to listen to them and instead offer prepackaged, often
irrelevant responses.
We might call this the "bulldozer method" of apologetics. It fails to show love and
respect for others and is sometimes even used as a weapon to humiliate others. If you
use the bulldozer method, you may win the argument, but you will almost certainly
lose the relationship, making the person less open to hearing the gospel in the future.
Using apologetics in an attempt to annihilate your atheist friends on social media, silence
opposition to Christianity, or deride those who reject your faith are all abuses of Christian
The goal of apologetics is not primarily to win arguments. In breaking down false
beliefs, apologists' goal is to help the person replace their false beliefs with truth.? This
means that apologetics is not just presenting facts but engaging in dialogue. We would
do well to take a page from the apostle Paul's book. Much like God's own call to Israel,
"Come now, let us reason together" (Isaiah 1:18), Paul's apologetic method was to reason
with Jews from the Scriptures (Acts 17:2) and with Gentiles using illustrations from
their own culture (Acts 17:22-31). He encouraged people to speak the truth with love
(Ephesians 4:15) and to strive to live at peace as much as possible (Romans 12:18).
7. Approaching Evangelism and Apologetics
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to describe appropriate weapons Christians can
use in the spiritual battle against evil.
Christian theologian Francis Schaeffer once said, "The Lord's work must be done
in the Lord's way." 13 In our zeal for others to know Jesus, it can be tempting to use
worldly methods, which include manipulating people in an attempt to convert them,
misrepresenting the gospel to make it more attractive, minimizing the cost of discipleship,
and relying exclusively on one's own reason and savvy to prove that Christianity is true.
We may get results when we use such methods, but we are no longer doing the Lord's work
in a way that honors him. The attitude that anything and everything is acceptable if it gets
someone to trust Jesus is one that a Christian can never have.
If we are to do evangelism and apologetics in God's way, we prepare first by recognizing
we are fighting a spiritual battle:
For we do not wrestle against flesh and blood, but against the rulers, against the
authorities, against the cosmic powers over this present darkness, against the spiritual
forces of evil in the heavenly places. —Ephesians 6:12
In this battle, the enemy is not the non-
Christian; the enemy is Satan and the powers of
evil that have enslaved the world in sin. Using
worldly methods in this battle is not only wrong
(because such methods are themselves wrong)
but also ultimately ineffective. The powers
of evil cannot be defeated with their own
weapons. Rather, our chief weapons in this
spiritual battle are God's Word and prayer.
We ask God to open the hearts and minds of
people to the gospel, to convict them of their
CHAPTER 1 | 13
12 | CHAPTER 1


<!-- page-6 -->

need for Jesus, to grant us opportunities to share the gospel, and to give us the words to say
when we need them. We, like Paul, can pray for ourselves:
And also for me, that words may be given to me in opening my mouth boldly to
proclaim the mystery of the gospel, for which I am an ambassador in chains, that I may
declare it boldly, as I ought to speak. —Ephesians 6:19-20
Doing evangelism and apologetics in God's way also means doing them in love.
God became human in Jesus (John 1:14) and gave his life for us because he loves us
(John 3:16). Before his ascension, Jesus told his disciples, "As the Father has sent me, even
so I am sending you" (John 20:21). That is, just as Jesus embodied the love of God, we,
too, are sent into the world to be the loving hands
and feet of Jesus.
In Chapter 6, we'll turn our attention to the
& reason:
the ability
to think,
comprehend,
and draw
conclusions
use of reason in apologetics. Reason is the ability
to think, comprehend, and draw conclusions.
Chapter 6 is about learning to use our
reasoning well to make logical arguments. As
Christians, we are commanded to love God with
our minds (Luke 10:27). Using our God-given
reasoning capacity in apologetics is one of the
ways we do this. Reasoning well also shows love
and respect for those we engage in conversation.
This is especially important because, in today's world, gracious and reasonable dialogue
between people who disagree is often hard to come by. If you listen to any televised
political debate, you will hear an endless string of name-calling, straw men, unsupported
assertions, oversimplification, uncharitable statements, and other poor arguments. Such
tactics may sway popular opinion, but they remain out-of-bounds for the Christian. That's
why before we address the big questions in this book, we'll consider the importance of
listening, clarifying our terms, and arguing well. We'll then go on to examine a whole
string of common logical errors and how to avoid them.
8. The Limitations of Reason and the Role of
Doubt
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to explain the roles of reason and doubt in
Reason is crucial in apologetics; however, humans are more than rational beings—we are
more than our minds. We are embodied beings shaped not only by what we know but also
by our experiences, desires, and loves.!" That is why even the best reason-based apologetics
sometimes fail. You may give someone a dozen reasonable arguments why Christianity
is true, yet if they do not desire to follow Jesus or have had negative experiences with
Christians, your reasons may not help much. Evangelism and apologetics can go beyond
reason to address the whole person.
However, apologetics is often conducted at a purely rational level. And this can result
in a fixation with certainty. Some believe we can acquire certainty about what is true
through reason. But it is impossible to prove that Christianity (or anything else) is true
beyond any possible doubt. Here's why:
Every belief we hold rests on some previous belief that cannot itself be proven. For
example, someone may believe that God exists and have good reasons for believing it,
yet no one can prove beyond a shadow of a doubt that God exists! Contrary to popular
belief, this is not a problem. Reasonable people believe many things without having
absolute proof for them. For example, you probably believe you are awake and reading this
book, but can you prove you are not dreaming? Even if you cannot prove this absolutely,
to get on in the world, you must act on the (quite reasonable) belief that you are awake
and that your actions matter.
Because our beliefs rest on other beliefs that cannot be proven, the quest for absolute
certainty will always end in failure and disillusionment. This is why some people today
simply give up the possibility of discovering the truth at all. However, just because we
cannot obtain absolute certainty doesn't mean truth doesn't exist. As it turns out, we can
have a reasonable degree of confidence about what is true, but to discover truth, we must
commit to someone or something that cannot itself be proved absolutely! For Christians,
that someone is Jesus. If Jesus is the truth (as he claims in John 14:6), then truth is
personal; to know truth, we must get to know him.
Ultimately, no one is or can be a Christian merely based on reason. According
to Scripture, the gospel—the idea that God became human and gave his life for the
world—is mere folly to some and downright
offensive to others (1 Corinthians 1:23). We
are not Christians because of pure rationality
or the absence of any possible doubts. We are
Christians because we have experienced Jesus'
love and grace and placed our trust in him.?
If absolute certainty is not possible, then
doubt is inevitable. But doubt is not necessarily
a bad thing. If you've never had any doubts
at all about Christianity, it's possible that you
haven't considered it carefully enough. Having
doubts does not mean that you are losing your
Doubt is not
necessarily
a bad thing.
faith. If we let it, doubt can stimulate growth
and maturity. It can drive us to investigate what we really believe and to get to know Jesus
on a deeper level. That's why, in Chapter 7, we'll explore why doubt arises and what to do
when it does. We'll also see why considering the nature of someone's doubt plays a vital
role in apologetics.
CHAPTER 1 | 15
14 | CHAPTER 1


<!-- page-7 -->

9. Some Questions of Apologetics
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to examine the nine questions commonly asked
about the Christian worldview.
Having laid the foundation for the tasks of evangelism and apologetics in Chapters 1-7,
Chapters 8-16 will take us deeper into the world of apologetics, where we'll address some
common challenges to the Christian worldview. Here's a brief survey of the questions we'll
be covering:
• Is claiming truth intolerant? (Chapter 8) —Many people today believe there is no
such thing as truth or that truth is relative to the individual or culture. So, when
Christians claim Jesus is the ultimate truth for everyone, they are often considered
intolerant. In this chapter, we'll unpack terms like truth, relativism, and tolerance.
We'll see that truth is knowable in the person of Jesus, and sharing the truth with
grace is one of the most loving things we can do.
• Are all religions the same?
(Chapter 9) —One assumption
shared by many religious people
today is the notion that all religions
are essentially alike and will all lead
=
to God. In this chapter, we'll see
that while many religions appear
similar, they actually differ widely
on fundamental issues and lead to
different values, ways of living,
and deities.
• Is religion irrelevant? (Chapter 10) —Many people think religion is ultimately
irrelevant to modern life, even though it may help people feel good. Others are
openly hostile to religion, seeing it as the primary source of evil in the world. This
chapter questions these secular assumptions and discusses what true religion looks
like to God.
• Is belief in the supernatural outdated? (Chapter 11) —The key event of Christianity
is the resurrection of Jesus, considered impossible by modern scientific standards. In
this chapter, we'll uncover good reasons to believe in the resurrection, other miracles,
and God himself. We'll also see a worldview that includes the supernatural provide
an entirely plausible picture of the universe.
• Is Christianity anti-science? (Chapter 12)—A frequent claim is that Christianity
and science are incompatible. In this chapter, we'll break down some common
myths about conflicts between Christianity and science. We'll also see why science is
impossible without assumptions borrowed from a theistic worldview.
• Why do evil and suffering exist? (Chapter 13)
-One of the oldest and most
difficult challenges to Christianity is the problem of evil. How could a good God
allow suffering? Admittedly, there are no easy answers to this question. In this
chapter, we'll learn how various worldviews address the problem of evil and see how
Christianity provides a unique answer.
• What's the deal with hell? (Chapter 14) —Would a good God condemn people to
hell for all eternity? This chapter will look at the doctrine of hell, what it means, and
why it is in the Bible.
• What does the Bible have to say about violence, slavery, and racism? (Chapter
15) —People who read the Old Testament often struggle with the number of
troubling practices seemingly ordained by God, including genocide, slavery, racism,
and ethnocentrism. In this chapter, we'll talk about how to read and understand these
passages, what they say about God, and what they mean for us today.
• What does the Bible have to say about sex and gender? (Chapter 16)—Many
believe that the Bible is anti-LGBTQ and anti-sex. In this chapter, we'll address these
challenges by examining what Scripture says about each topic.
These questions aren't easy to answer, and we do not address them extensively in this
textbook. However, as we work through each question, we'll call on the help of wise and
competent theologians, apologists, storytellers, poets, pastors, and philosophers. Our hope
is that these chapters will stimulate your thinking, help you be more confident in what
you believe, and equip you to share it with others.
10. Conclusion
It's one thing to read a textbook about evangelism and apologetics. It's another thing to
actually do evangelism and apologetics. This book can help you, but ultimately, the best
way to learn is through practice. That's why, in Chapter 17, we'll bring everything together
to discuss what it looks like for you to faithfully witness for Jesus using the gifts he has
given you. We'll talk about the importance of being winsome, informed, and strategic.
We'll discuss the need for perseverance, patience, and prayer. And we'll see that being a
faithful witness for Jesus can take many forms.
Perhaps you feel inadequate or unprepared to do apologetics
and evangelism. It's tempting to think you need to have all
the answers figured out before sharing your faith. This is false.
When Jesus called his disciples to share the good news, they
did not have much training at first, yet he sent them out with
his authority (Mark 6:7-13) in the power of the Holy Spirit
(Acts 1:8) to imitate his lifestyle and preach the gospel. In the
same way, God has empowered you to be a part of his mission.
Though preparation and continued learning are crucial, you can
be confident that God's Spirit goes with you when you faithfully
seek to share the gospel.
Maybe you already feel confident in what you believe and
your ability to share it with others. We hope this book will
further equip you and help you grow in confidence and Christlike humility. As human
beings, each of us is limited in knowledge and understanding. It is always wise to be open
16 | CHAPTER 1
CHAPTER 1 | 17


<!-- page-8 -->

to learning new things and thinking about things differently than you may have before. A
faithful apologist knows that he or she does not have all the answers and there will always
be more to learn. We encourage you to approach this book in the same spirit.
Perhaps for you, reading this book is more about trying to sort out your own beliefs
than sharing them. You may be a Christian unsure about what you believe or a non-
Christian searching for the truth. Reading this book may challenge or stimulate you to
think about Christianity in ways that reflect God's character and design. Undoubtedly,
you will have questions not discussed in this book,
and you may find yourself dissatisfied with some of
the ways we've tried to address the questions. That is
okay. The important thing is to be open to learning
and to keep seeking answers in the company of wise
friends and mentors. You can be sure that Jesus
wants to walk alongside you wherever you are on
your journey.
Maybe you are reading this textbook merely to
complete an assignment. Whether you call yourself
a Christian or not, you may or may not care much about Christianity. You may or may
not be interested in the questions discussed in this book. If that's you, we want you to
know you are welcome here, too. We hope you will find something here that sparks your
interest and makes a difference in what you believe.
So, whoever you are—unprepared, confident, doubting, or unconcerned, Christian or
not—we welcome you into the journey of this book. In the following chapter, we'll begin
our study by looking at the Bible-its nature, inspiration, and reliability. Let's get started!
ENDNOTES -1
' Dean Flemming, Recovering the Full Mission of God: A Biblical Perspective on Being, Doing, and Telling
(Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 2013), 61-86.
2 Christopher J. H. Wright, The Mission of God: Unlocking the Bible's Grand Narrative (Downers Grove, IL:
InterVarsity Press, 2006), 22-23.
3 The paradigm of "being, doing, and telling" is from Dean Flemming, Recovering the Full Mission of God.
We have used Flemming's paradigm to frame the discussion for how God's people are called to engage in
God's mission.
* Norman L. Geisler, Jason Jimenez, The Bible's Answers to 100 of Life's Biggest Questions (Grand Rapids, MI:
Baker Books, 2015), 175.
" Geisler, The Bible's Answers to 100 of Life's Biggest Questions, 175.
•J. I. Packer, Evangelism and the Sovereignty of God (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 1991), 50.
James K. Beilby, Thinking About Christian Apologetics: What It Is and Why We Do It (Downers Grove, IL:
InterVarsity Press, 2011), 11.
8 Alister E. McGrath, Mere Apologetics: How to Help Seekers & Skeptics Find Faith (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker
Books, 2012), 17.
9 Paul M. Gould, Cultural Apologetics: Renewing the Christian Voice, Conscience, and Imagination in a
Disenchanted World (Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2019), 24-25.
10 We in no way want to suggest that all Christian evangelism tools misconstrue God's character or distort
the gospel. Though some do, others are powerful and effective.
" Common Witness: A Study Document of the Joint Working Group of the Roman Catholic Church and the
World Council of Churches, WCC Mission Series 1 (Geneva: WCC, 1984), 24-25, as quoted in Priscilla Pope-
Levison, Models of Evangelism (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2020), 23. This definition helpfully clarifies
what the word proselytism has come to mean. Summit does not claim affiliation with the Roman Catholic Church
or the World Council of Churches.
12 Christopher B. Strevel, "The Development of Van Til's Presuppositionalism in the Apologetic Practice of
Greg Bahnsen," Chalcedon Report, February 1, 2004, chalcedon.edu/magazine/the-development-of-van-tils-
presuppositionalism-in-the-apologetic-practice-of-greg-bahnsen.
13 Francis A. Schaeffer, "The Lord's Work in the Lord's Way," in No Little People (Wheaton, IL: Crossway,
2021), 73-88.
14 James K. A. Smith, Desiring the Kingdom: Worship, Worldview, and Cultural Formation (Grand Rapids, MI:
Baker Academic, 2009), 40-42.
15 McGrath, Mere Apologetics, 78.
16 Lesslie Newbigin, Proper Confidence: Faith, Doubt, and Certainty in Christian Discipleship (Grand Rapids,
MI: Eerdmans, 1995), 49-50.
1 Jonathan Ammon, The Prophetic Apologetic: A Charismatic Approach to Christian Apologetics (n.p.:
Lowerlight Books, 2020), 19.
10V 2ШТІР
| CHAPTER 1
CHAPTER 1 | 19
