# Chapter 3

<!-- page-1 (book p.39) -->

The Shape of
Di
God's Story
CAMER
DATE: ALphat
Fite
1. The Power of Stories
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to express the power of stories.
Human beings love to tell stories. Take a trip to your local library, movie theater, art
museum, concert venue, playhouse, campground, or family dinner table, and you'll see
ample evidence. Humans have been telling stories for a long time. As early as 4,000 years,
ago an anonymous poet put a stylus to a clay tablet and wrote the Epic of Gilgamesh, one
of the oldest known stories in the world. It is an adventure tale about a man searching for
eternal life. Ever since, humans have been writing stories—from Homer's Odyssey to Jane
Austen's Pride and Prejudice to Cormac McCarthy's The Road. These stories have been
translated into songs, plays, pictures, and films, and new stories are being created daily.
The best stories illuminate the human condition and echo aspects of the world's true
story encapsulated in our creation, fall, and redemption! This is why people love J. R.
R. Tolkien's Lord of the Rings trilogy—not only because it is so well-written but because
it sheds light on the beauty and the brokenness of our world.
Movies like The Dark Knight are popular not only because
they're action-packed but because they inspire us with a
sense of justice in a world where it often seems beyond
our reach.
So, what is it with humans and stories? Why do we
keep telling them? The shortest answer is humans are,
by nature, storytelling creatures? Our very lives are "story-
shaped."3 Each person's life has a plot—a beginning inside a mother's womb,
a middle in which action, experience, adventure, and romance may occur, and an ending
in death. Because our lives are story-shaped, something deep within us draws us to stories.
Christian writer Frederick Buechner explained:
Every storyteller ... looks out at the world... and sees things happening—people
being born, growing up, working, loving, getting old, and finally dying.... By the
very process of taking certain of these events and turning them into a story, giving
them form and direction, [the storyteller makes] a sort of claim about events in general,
about the nature of life itself. And the storyteller's claim, I believe, is that life has
meaning-that the things that happen to people happen not just by accident... but
that there is order and purpose deep down behind them or inside them.*
Humans love stories because stories suggest meaning. As one apologist describes, we
use "stories to remember our past, make sense of our present, and shape our future."
They show a purpose and order to the seemingly chaotic and disorganized events that
happen to us. We tell stories to understand these events and make sense of our lives. Our
problem is we are, as theologian lain Provan puts it, "middled." Our stories are not yet
finished; we are still in the middle
of them and don't know how they
will end. "Lacking a comprehensive
account of the beginning and any
account of the end, we have great
difficulty in ... knowing who we
really are, and what we should be
doing with our lives. If we do not
know the end or goal of our stories,
how then can we discern the meaning
of our lives?
CHAPTER 3


<!-- page-2 -->

2. The Bible as a Metanarrative
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to explain the importance of understanding the
biblical metanarrative.
The answer to these questions is found when we connect our stories to a bigger story,
which can help us make sense of our own. What we need is a metanarrative. A
metanarrative is the story beyond the story;
an overarching narrative that makes sense of
everything.
A metanarrative is a comprehensive story
that gives purpose to our stories. It influences
& metanarrative:
the story beyond the story;
an overarching narrative that
makes sense of everything
how we behave in the world. For example,
think of Han Solo in the original Star Wars
trilogy. When we first meet Solo, he is an
arrogant smuggler who is only concerned with
himself. Yet he later discovers that he is part of
a bigger story—the cosmic battle between good
and evil. He finds purpose and direction in
his life by befriending and aiding others in the
fight against evil.
There are many metanarratives in the world today. Most offer us a way of becoming
part of something bigger than ourselves. Yet, these various metanarratives conflict. One
metanarrative may lead us to think and act in a specific way. A different narrative may
recommend other ways to think and act. If we are to live purposefully, we must know the
bigger story we are a part of. Philosopher Alasdair MacIntyre says it this way: I can only
answer the question, "What am I to do?" if I can answer the prior question "Of what story
or stories do I find myself a part?"
The claim we'll make throughout this book is that we are a part of God's story. This
is the true story of the world, encapsulated in the metanarrative of the Bible. Here's an
outline of that story.
ACTS IN THE BIBLICAL
METANARRATIVE
DESCRIPTION
PRIMARY TEXTS
Act 1: Creation-
God's Good World
God creates a good world where humans,
made in God's image, can live in harmony
with him, themselves, others, and creation.
Genesis 1-2
Act 2: The Fall-Sin
and Its Consequences
Sin corrupts God's world, leading to evil,
the breakdown of relationships, and death.
Genesis 3-11
40 | CHAPTER 3
APOLOGETICS 9
Act 3: Redemption
Initiated-Israel
Interlude: The Second
Temple Period
God chooses Abraham's family to be a
blessing to the whole world by making
them a kingdom of priests and a holy
people.
After their failure to be faithful to God,
subsequent exile, and return to Israel, the
people of God wait for a Messiah.
Torah,
Prophets,
Writings
Ezra, Nehemiah,
Esther, Daniel;
Second Temple
literature
Act 4: Redemption
Accomplished-Jesus
Jesus comes to Earth announcing the
kingdom of God. He lives a sinless life,
is crucified, and rises from the dead in
triumph over evil, sin, and death. He
makes reconciliation possible.
Gospels
Act 5: Restoration
Initiated-The Church
Jesus ascends. The Holy Spirit empowers
God's people, the church, to spread the
good news through their proclamation and
practice as they await the full restoration
of all things.
Acts, Epistles
Act 6: Restoration
Accomplished-New
Creation
Jesus returns to Earth at the end of history
to judge everyone and establish the
kingdom of God. Sin is banished forever,
and all things are made new.
Revelation
figure 3.2
Everyone is invited to become an active participant in God's story. In doing so,
we experience God's grace, find meaning for our lives, and are commissioned to be
storytellers ourselves—people who share the good news and invite others into God's story.
It is crucial for Christians to understand the biblical story because if we do not, we will
inevitably live out of a false story provided by the culture? That's why in the remainder of
this chapter, we'll trace out the biblical story in a little more detail.
3. Act 1: Creation God's Good World
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to describe three main traits of imago Dei and the
four relationships for which human beings were designed.
The Bible's metanarrative (figure 3.2) begins with the statement, "In the beginning,
God created the heavens and the earth" (Genesis 1:1). In this line, the Bible is making two
important claims first, God exists; second, God is the Creator of all that is. The rest of
Genesis 1-2 goes on to describe God's creation ex nihilo out of nothing) of a purposeful,
orderly, and good world filled with sky, seas, sun, moon, stars, plants, animals, and people.
What kind of God is this Creator? Why did he create? The Bibles fundamental claim
about God is he is love (Psalm 86:15, 1 John 4:7-16). Love is inherent to God's character
G The Shape of God's Story
CHAPTER 3 | 41


<!-- page-3 -->

because he exists in a Trinity. God is one Being in three Persons-Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit—who exist eternally in a relationship of harmony and love. God did not need to
create the world because he was bored, lonely, or wanted someone to do his work. Instead,
he made it so we might know him and share in the life-giving love of the Trinity.!°
The creation story in Genesis 1
culminates with the creation of human
beings. Unique among creatures, God
Simago Dei: the idea that
humans were created in
God's likeness
made humans, both male and female,
in his image (Genesis 1:27). This is the
imago Dei-the idea that humans were
created in God's likeness.
To be made in God's image-that is,
to be an image-bearer—involves at least
three things. First, it involves rule. God
gave humans the responsibility to fill
the earth with people, rule over all other
creatures, and help the earth flourish
through wise stewardship (Genesis 1:26-30). Second, it involves relationship. Specifically,
there are four relationships for which humans were designed:
1. Relationship with God—Humans depend on God for life and are meant to be in
the closest possible relationship with him. All of their ruling is to be done as an act
of worship in loving partnership with God.
2. Relationship with self-Humans are made to be whole and at peace with
themselves. In the beginning, humans were not plagued by anxiety, self-loathing, or
depression.
3. Relationship with others—Genesis 2:18 makes it clear that humans are intended
for relationship with other people. The instructions God gave Adam and Eve
required them to work in close relationship with one another.
4. Relationship with nature—Humans are given a special responsibility to protect,
steward, and preserve the rest of creation. The plants and animals of the natural
world are to be seen as gifts to be enjoyed rather than objects to be exploited.
Finally, image-bearing includes resemblance. Humans are equipped with godly
attributes, such as reason, wisdom, love, and creativity, to fulfill the mission God gave
humankind.
The image of God points us to the purpose and goal of creation. To put it simply,
creation is for God's glory. To say something has glory is to say it has weight or value.
Thus, creation proclaims God's worth, wisdom, and power (Psalm 19:1; Psalm 104:24-25;
Isaiah 40:26). As God's image-bearers, we, too, were created for his glory (Isaiah 43:7).
And to paraphrase the church father, Irenaeus, the glory of God is a human, fully alive."
What this means is we glorify God, attesting to his goodness, wisdom, power, and love,
when we live as the image-bearers he created us to be.
We can sum up Genesis 1-2 like this: The wise, loving, and powerful Trinitarian God
created a good world and filled it with life. He then made humans in his image to reflect
his glory and invited them to partner with him in ruling the earth and bringing it to
greater abundance. This is where God's mission begins.
4. Act 2: The Fall Sin and Its Consequences
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to articulate how the first sin affected God's
perfect creation.
Looking out on all he had created, God proclaimed everything "very good." Then, he
rested (Genesis 1:31-2:3). Creation was in a state of shalom, a Hebrew word that expresses
peace, harmony, and wholeness. Sadly, this shalom was shattered by a terrible rebellion.
In Genesis 3, a mysterious serpent tempted Adam and Eve to eat from the Tree of the
Knowledge of Good and Evil, the only tree God told them not to eat from (Genesis 2:16-17).
The serpent then implied God had been holding out on them. If they ate from this tree,
they wouldn't actually die like God had warned. Instead, the serpent said they would
become like God. They would gain a measure of independence, their eyes would be opened,
and they would know good and evil for themselves (Genesis 2:4-5). By casting doubt
on God's word and character, the serpent sought to break the trust between God and
humans.? Sadly, the serpent's plan succeeded. Enticed by lies, no longer content to bear
God's image, and desiring to be like God themselves, Adam
and Eve ate from the tree!
This was the first human sin. However, sin is not merely a
matter of breaking rules. Sin is far more insidious. The Bible
commonly uses three different words to describe what sin is:!4
1. Sin: to miss the goal, failing to love God and others
2. Transgression: to rebel or break trust with
another person
3. Iniquity: crooked, wicked, or perverse behavior
These words show the first sin was not so much about
eating a piece of fruit as it was about Adam and Eve failing to
love and trust God, rebelling against him, and rejecting their
role as God's image-bearers.
Their act of rebellion plunged the world into chaos and
disorder. Upon eating from the tree, they immediately
realized they were naked. Ashamed, they tried to clothe themselves with fig leaves. When
God sought them, they tried to hide from him. Mercifully, he made garments for them
and banished them from the garden of Eden so they could no longer eat from the Tree of
Life. The harmonious relationships of the creation were broken (Genesis 3:14-19). God was
no longer seen as a loving Creator but as a Power to be feared. Humans were separated
from God and experienced shame, fear, and anxiety. They treated one another as objects
Adam, Eve, and
the Serpent, 1907,
Sunrays quarterly
42 | CHAPTER 3
CHAPTER 3 | 43
S The Shape of God's Story


<!-- page-4 -->

to be used instead of as people to be loved. Nature also became an enemy to be mastered
and exploited rather than a gift to be stewarded and enjoyed.
Genesis 3-11 further describes the fallout from Adam and Eve's rebellion. The ground
was cursed. Cain murdered his brother. Lamech murdered a man. The earth was filled
with violence, corruption, and wickedness to the point that people could hardly think
about anything but evil. People also banded
together to defy God. The fallout continues to
this day-fear and hatred of God, violence,
war, chaos, abuse, murder, self-destruction, and
exploitation of others and the natural world.
Paul tells us in Romans 5:12-21 that sin
entered the world through one man, and so, sin
has infected us all. In other words, because of the
fall, all humans inherit a sin nature. This is what
theologians call the doctrine of original sin. Paul
also says that people have become slaves to sin
(Romans 6:6), and there is no one who does good
(Romans 3:10-12, see also Psalm 14:1-3). This
doesn't mean that humans are incapable of doing anything right. Sin damages the image
of God, but it does not destroy it.! The tragedy of the fall is this: we are so thoroughly
fallen that nothing remains unaffected by our fallenness. All our relationships have been
damaged. We are so absolutely fallen, and there's nothing we can do to fix ourselves, for
sin has untethered us from the only true source of life. Apart from Christ, we are dead in
our sins and subject to Satan's power (Ephesians 2:1-7).
5. Act 3: Redemption Initiated Israel
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to summarize Israel's role in God's redemptive
plan.
How, then, will God bring blessing to his world through humans? What we see in Genesis
3-11 is that God continues to pursue his plans for creation and his plan for the world. In
Genesis 3:15, God made a promise that someday, one of Eve's offspring would arise, and
at a terrible cost to himself, bruise the head of the serpent. This promised Offspring would
break the power of evil and set humanity free from bondage to sin. But the world would
have to wait for this Promised One. In the meantime, God chose one family through
which he would accomplish his mission.
In Genesis 12:1-3, God called Abraham to pack up his belongings and head to the land
of Canaan. God promised him:
"I will make of you a great nation, and I will bless you and make your name great, so
that you will be a blessing. I will bless those who bless you, and him who dishonors you
I will curse, and in you all the families of the earth shall be blessed."
God made good on this promise. Miraculously, the formerly childless Abraham and
Sarah produced a son in their old age. In just a few generations, Abraham's family grew
into the nation of Israel and settled outside Canaan in the land of Egypt. Wary of the
growth and prosperity of the Israclites, the Egyptians decided to enslave them (Exodus 1).
The Israelites would spend the next 400 years in slavery before God raised up a deliverer to
lead them out of bondage and back to the promised land of Canaan.
The book of Exodus records how God worked through a man named Moses to lead
Israel to freedom. As the people made their way to the Promised Land, God revealed
himself as a God of "steadfast love and faithfulness" (Exodus 34:6-7), who had chosen
Israel to be a "kingdom of priests and a holy nation" (Exodus 19:6). In other words, God
chose the Israelites to be the bearers of his blessing to the whole world. He didn't choose
Israel because they were the biggest or the best nation, but out of love and in faithfulness
to his covenant with Abraham (Deuteronomy 7:7-9). Though they were God's chosen
people, Israel did not have a unique claim on God. Instead, they had a mission to others, a
responsibility to the world.!
Israel's role in God's mission was to "be a God-shaped community before the nations."!
Having received grace and salvation in the exodus, Israel was to show the world what
life in relationship with God could look like. They would do this through obedience to
the Ten Commandments and other laws given to Moses (collectively known as the Law).
According to missiologist Dean Flemming, this Law provided "a concrete, culturally
specific example of what life under God's rule looks like." Israel's obedience to the Law
would show "how God intends life to be lived." 18
Yet Israel turned away from the mission and failed to be a light to the nations (Isaiah
5:1-7). Even before God's people entered the promised land, they broke God's laws. Later,
as they grew into a powerful nation, their leaders led them into idolatry and injustice.
After only three kings, Israel looked like most other nations, concerned only with its own
affairs. Soon, disunity and unrest caused the nation to be torn in two. Throughout all of
this, God made numerous provisions for his people. He provided the tabernacle and the
temple where they could experience his presence. God renewed the covenant he made with
King David with his people. He also sent prophets to instruct the people in God's ways,
warn them about judgment, and call them to faithfulness. Eventually, their persistent
rejection of God led to disaster.
44 | CHAPTER 3
S The Shape of God's Story
Panorama of
Mount Sinai in
Sinai Peninsula
of Egypt.
CHAPTER 3 | 45


<!-- page-5 -->

Queen Esther,
Périgueux
Cathedral,
Perigueux,
France
46 | CHAPTER 3
6. Interlude: The Second Temple Period
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to describe Israel's struggles and hopes during the
second temple period.
In 722 Bc, the northern Kingdom of Israel was overrun by the Assyrians,
and the exiles were scattered abroad. However, some remained in the
land and intermarried with the Assyrians.!' The southern Kingdom of
Judah was conquered by the Babylonians in 587 Bc, and most Jews
were exiled to Babylon. For those who lived through these events, it
must have seemed God had finally abandoned his people. Yet, the
ГБс
prophets said otherwise—the Israelites were being judged for their
persistent evil, but a day would come when the fortunes of God's
people would be restored (Isaiah 40-55, Zechariah 10).
For Jews living in exile, the challenge was how to remain
faithful to God amid pagan cultures. The prophet Jeremiah urged
them to "seek the welfare" of the city they had been exiled to and to
"pray to the LoRD on its behalf" (Jeremiah 29:7). At the same time,
they were not to adopt the idolatrous practices of their neighbors.
The Bible records several stories of faithfulness in exile. Daniel,
Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah rose to leadership positions in
Babylon but refused to participate in pagan idolatry. Esther became
a queen in Persia and used her influence to save the Jewish people
from destruction.
In 538 Bc, following the fall of Babylon, King Cyrus of Persia
issued a decree saying the Jews could return to their homeland and rebuild the temple. The
decree gave new life to the Jewish people. Many returned, the temple was rebuilt, reform
was initiated, and laws were reinstated—the second temple period had begun. Yet the
Jewish nation never achieved the glory it had before the exile. For the next several hundred
years, the Jews would exist as a small, relatively free people in Judea, though always under
the control of a foreign power, such as the Persians, the Greeks, or the Romans.
The Greeks had a long-lasting impact on the Jews. As Alexander the Great conquered
the Mediterranean world, he introduced Greek culture everywhere he went. This process,
known as hellenization, would continue long after Alexander's death. Soon, Jews felt
pressure to abandon their distinctive beliefs and practices in favor of Greek ones. This
pressure came to a boiling point under the brutal King Antiochus IV. His blatant
disregard for Jewish customs and outright persecution of Jews eventually led to revolt. Led
by Judah Maccabee, Jews, zealous for the Torah and the God of Israel, took arms against
their enemies. On December 25, 164 Bc, Judah Maccabee triumphantly rode into Jerusalem
with his army (amidst "shouts of "hosanna' and the waving of palm branches) and cleansed
the temple.2 By 142 c, Jewish independence had been achieved.
It was not to last. The Maccabee family and their descendants proved to be power-
hungry tyrants. In 63 Bc, the Romans conquered Jerusalem and put their own rulers
in charge. The most famous of these was Herod the Great, prominently featured in the
story of Jesus' birth (Matthew 2). Later, Rome ruled Judea through prefects, such as
the notorious Pilate, who allowed Jesus to be crucified (Matthew 27). Through all these
events, Jews divided over how to respond to the ruling powers: the Pharisees called for
strict adherence to the Torah and oral traditions, the Sadducees aligned themselves with
the powerful, the Essenes fled to the desert, and the Zealots made violent attempts to cast
off Roman oppression.
It was a time of chaos and confusion. The second temple period was one of the
most tumultuous periods in the history of the Jewish people. The belief that God was
not finished with Israel sustained them through it all. The Jews longed for deliverance
from their oppressors, the establishment of shalom, the arrival of God's kingdom, the
forgiveness of sins, and a messiah who would lead them to victory." And so, they waited,
hoped, and prayed.
7. Act 4: Redemption Accomplished Jesus
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to explain how Jesus accomplished redemption.
Sometime in the early first century, a child was born in a stable in Bethlehem to a virgin
named Mary and her fiancé Joseph. Something remarkable had just happened. The Child
born in the stable that night was supernaturally conceived through the Holy Spirit
and was God himself in human flesh (John 1:14). Theologians know this event as the
Incarnation. The Child's name was Jesus, derived from the name Joshua, which means
Yahweh saves. At last, the Promised One who would bruise the head of the serpent had
arrived-Jesus, the Messiah (Matthew 1:21). His birth fulfilled the words of the prophets
who told the world how and where the Messiah would be
born (Isaiah 7:14, 9:6-7; Micah 5:2; Hosea 11:1) And Jesus
was born right on time, in the place and among the people of
God's divine choosing, for his purposes, and for the good of
all creation.
We know little about Jesus in his early years, though we
can imagine him playing in the streets, helping Joseph with
his carpentry, eating, sleeping, and dreaming, just like any
other boy. The Bible says Jesus increased in wisdom and stature
(Luke 2:52). Though he was fully God, Jesus was also fully
& kingdom of God!
the just and
peaceful rule of God
over all creation
human, yet without sin. He was tempted like we are but never
gave in to evil (Hebrews 4:15). His life demonstrated perfect
obedience to the Father's will.
Jesus began his public ministry around age 30, when he announced, "The time is
fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is at hand; repent and believe in the gospel" (Mark
1:15. Jesus primary message was that the kingdom of God-that is, the just and peaceful
rule of God over all creation-was arriving through him.
Such an announcement would have generated great excitement among the Jews.
Everywhere he went, Jesus taught about the kingdom and demonstrated its power through
miracles and healings. Yet Jesus talked about the kingdom of God in ways people did
CHAPTER 3 | 47


<!-- page-6 -->

not expect. Instead of taking up arms to crush Israel's enemies, Jesus urged the Jews to
forgive and bless them. Instead of preaching about worldly power, Jesus preached about
suffering and love. Instead of commending the Jewish leaders for their strict observance
of the law, he condemned them for their hypocrisy and injustice. To top it all off, Jesus
regularly spent time with those considered to
be unrighteous—prostitutes, tax collectors, and
d gospel:
the good
news that
Jesus is Lord
and that
salvation and
forgiveness
are available
to all through
him
Gentiles.
Jesus was not the messiah that Israel expected.
So, after three short years of ministry, he was put
to death on a cross. For some, his death seemed to
show Jesus was just another failed messiah. Yet, the
gospel writers claimed that Jesus, God's Son, gave
his life willingly for the sins of the world (Matthew
26:52-56; Mark 10:45; Luke 22:42; John 3:16, 10:18).
When Jesus died on the cross as our substitute, it
was "God himself suffering the consequences of sin"
for us." Jesus took the full weight of human evil
on himself and defeated it. He canceled "the record
of debt that stood against us" so we could be forgiven and freed to live new lives for God
(Colossians 2:13-15). Jesus was the only One who could free us from sin. As it turned out,
the cross was actually a moment of victory.
Three days after his death, Jesus demonstrated this victory by rising from the dead,
opening the way to a new world where resurrection and reconciliation are possible.
He appeared in his resurrected body to hundreds of people (1 Corinthians 15:6). Jesus
gathered his disciples and commissioned them to be his witnesses throughout the world.
Jesus embodied the mission of God. He is what the whole biblical metanarrative is about.
The events of his life announce to us the gospel the good news that Jesus is Lord and that
salvation and forgiveness are available to all through him.
8. Act 5: Restoration Initiated The Church
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to relate how the gospel brings reconciliation to
all our relationships.
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to discuss the role of the church in spreading
the gospel.
Then, forty days after his resurrection, Jesus ascended to God's throne, taking his place as
the rightful ruler of the universe (Acts 1:1-9). Through Jesus, the world has forever changed.
He rules the universe as its rightful Lord and freely offers forgiveness and salvation to all who
trust in him. However, not everyone acknowledges his rule, and not everyone has heard the
good news or knows what it means. That's where the church comes in.
Shortly after Jesus ascended to heaven, the Holy Spirit descended on Jesus' disciples
empowering them to share the gospel message. In a single day, 3,000 people became
Christians (Acts 2). As the gospel spread like wildfire, small Jesus communities sprang up
all over the Roman empire. These communities became known as churches. Today, there
are churches all over the world. The word church describes the followers of Christ in all
places and times.
The Bible uses the Greek word ekklesia to describe the church. In the Roman Empire,
an ekklesia referred to a public assembly. The church might have described itself using terms
like beranos or thiasos, which referred to private religious cults that offered personal and
otherworldly salvation. By instead choosing ekklesia, the believers made it clear the church
is a public body, called by God to be a new people tasked with sharing the good newe
about Jesus with the world.?3 Paul wrote that we are "ambassadors for Christ," given the
"ministry of reconciliation" (2 Corinthians 5:17-20). This gospel message has implications
for all our relationships.
First, it means we can be reconciled to God. Because of our sin, we all stand guilty
before God, having failed to love and obey him as we ought. However, Jesus died on our
behalf so we might be declared righteous before God (Romans 5:1, 1 Peter 3:18). Through
his grace, we have received forgiveness, salvation, and new life in Christ.
Second, we can be reconciled to ourselves. Sin tears at the fabric of our inner being,
but in Jesus, we have been set free from sin's power (Romans 8:2) and can begin to live for
Jesus. We will, no doubt, stumble and fall as we struggle to live out our new life in Jesus
(Romans 7:15, 18). The good news is we are not alone. Jesus sent the Holy Spirit to help us
(John 16:7-8, 13-14). The Spirit works within us to transform us into the image of Christ
(2 Corinthians 3:17-18, Galatians 5:22-23).
Third, we can be reconciled to others. Having experienced Jesus' love, we are now free
to share that love with others. As the Spirit works in us, we learn to forgive, show grace
and mercy, live in peace, and be reconciled to our enemies. By demonstrating love for one
another through words and actions, Christians
become a witness to the transforming love of
Jesus (John 13:35). Paul described the church
as the body of Christ, made up of many
members who care for one another as they do
God's work in the world (Romans 12:4-18).
Finally, we can be reconciled with nature.
At present, the creation groans under bondage
to sin (Romans 8:19-22). Through Jesus, we
are restored to our image-bearing vocations.
We come to see creation as a gift to be wisely
stewarded and cared for as God desires. As we unleash our creativity into the world, we
receive what God has made, respectit, and use it in ways that bring God glory.
The gospel message is about cosmic renewal, beginning in our hearts, transforming
our communities, and extending the blessing of God's rule to all creation. The church
has been invited to participate in God's mission to the world by sharing this message.
Empowered by the Holy Spirit, the church shares the gospel, demonstrating the good
news of God's kingdom through word and deed.
& church:
the followers
of Christ in
all places
and times
48 | CHAPTER 3
CHAPTER 3 | 49


<!-- page-7 -->

9. Act 6: Restoration Accomplished New Creation
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to describe what will take place during the second
coming and new creation.
Through Jesus, the kingdom of God has broken into the world. But if the kingdom
of God means the just and peaceful rule of God over all creation, why is there still so
much injustice, disunity, and unrest? Why does
evil still run rampant? The reason is that God's
& second coming:
Jesus' personal and visible
return from heaven to Earth
kingdom, though already inaugurated in Jesus,
has not yet fully arrived. The church lives in an
in-between time. Through its members distinctive
lives patterned after Jesus and their witness to
the gospel, the church becomes a sign of God's
kingdom already present on earth. Believers show
what a community reconciled to God looks like.24
Until Jesus returns, the kingdom of God
remains a somewhat hidden reality. The kingdom
of God is hidden because it comes through
sacrificial love rather than in overwhelming power that demands immediate assent.? As
the believers live a kingdom life in the midst of an idolatrous culture, its members will
inevitably suffer persecution, just as Jesus did (John 15:20). Faithfulness in the midst of
persecution will draw others to Jesus. This is one of the themes of the book of Revelation,
which was written to Christians facing pressure to compromise their faith in order to
escape persecution. At a time when Caesar seemed to be the world's master, John wrote to
the church to reveal the true nature of reality-God is the one true ruler of the universe.
John urged the church to remain faithful, to follow Jesus' example in suffering, and to
wait for his return, when all things would be set right.
Jesus' personal and visible return from heaven to Earth is known as the second coming.
When Jesus returns, he will banish evil once and for all, ushering in the kingdom of
God in all its fullness. Jesus' second coming will mean judgment on evil, which is about
God bringing justice and making things right. Because God loves his world, he cannot
allow evil to forever destroy people and creation. Jesus will come to judge the "destroyers
of the earth" (Revelation 11:18) and to eradicate evil. Those who have rejected Jesus and
persisted in evil will spend eternity away from God's presence.
Jesus' return will mean the full arrival of God's kingdom. God will establish his
peaceful rule, and those who have trusted Jesus, called the bride of Christ, will be invited
to the great "marriage supper of the Lamb" (Revelation 19:6-10). There will be complete
reconciliation and intimacy between God and humans who will rule and reign with
him throughout eternity (Revelation 5:10). The Bible describes this final state as the new
heavens and the new earth or simply new creation. At the heart of this new creation is the
New Jerusalem, a magnificent city where God will be personally present to his people.
In that city, there will be no sun or moon because God will be the light (Revelation
21:23). There will be no more evil, death, sorrow, or suffering, for God will banish evil
forever and wipe away every tear (Revelation 21:4, 27). There will be a tree in the city "for
the healing of all nations" (Revelation 22:2). There will be no barriers to God's presence
(Revelation 21:22). People from every tribe, language, people, and nation will gather around
God's throne in worship and celebration (Revelation 5:9, Revelation 21:24, Zechariah 2:11).
Those who have trusted Jesus will live in freedom, peace, and love toward one another
(Isaiah 2:4). Restored in God's image, we will use our gifts and creativity to the fullest
extent as we partner with God in his purposeful work. With new resurrection bodies, we
will flourish in God's presence for all eternity.
10. Conclusion
The Bible is a long book filled with hundreds of stories, poems, and prayers. The biblical
metanarrative that we have surveyed in this chapter is what holds it all together. First
and foremost, it is a story about God, what he has done, is doing, and will do for the
world.26 It's a story about cosmic history, God's mission and actions in time and place,
and us. It doesn't merely report facts about history or doctrines about God but invites our
participation. Pastor-theologian Eugene Peterson explained:
Story doesn't just tell us something and leave it there, it invites our participation. A
good storyteller gathers us into the story. We feel the emotions, get caught up in the
drama, identify with the characters, see into nooks and crannies of life that we had
overlooked, land] realize that there is more to this business of being human than we
had yet explored.?
As we read the biblical story, the Holy Spirit makes the words of Scripture come alive
so that we find in the Bible's pages an invitation—an invitation to relationship with
God, to become the people we were created to be, and to get involved in God's mission
for the world.
The question is, then, how do we enter this story? We enter
it by trusting in Jesus as Lord and Savior. This begins with
recognizing that we are God's image-bearers, created in love to
be in relationship with him. We must acknowledge that we have
contributed to the world's evil, we are guilty of sin, and we can
do nothing to save ourselves. Finally, we accept that Jesus gave
his life for us on the cross, breaking the power of evil so that we
might be released from its stranglehold, graciously forgiven, and
empowered to become all that he created us to be. To believe
this and commit to Jesus in faith and trust is to enter the story
and become a Christian.
Yet the story we are invited into is not just about individual
salvation. Jesus' central message is about the kingdom of God
and the restoration of creation. That's why the biblical story is good news for all people, at
CHAPTER 3 | 51
50 | CHAPTER 3
G The Shape of God's Story


<!-- page-8 -->

all times and places. As New Testament theologian N. T. Wright puts it, "The whole point
of Christianity is that it offers a story which is the story of the whole world."28
The biblical metanarrative is not a Western story to be foisted upon other cultures
but a true, global story in which every individual, community, and nation can find its
place. It is a story that challenges all other cultural stories, but it does not demand that
we all look exactly alike. In fact, in God's new creation, people from every nation, tribe,
and tongue will worship together, retaining the strengths of their own cultures but not
their sins.? The universal scope of the biblical metanarrative centered around Jesus is
one reason why Christianity has spread all over
the globe, claiming 31 percent of the world's
Christianity
offers a story
which is the
story of the
whole world.
population. 30 Most of these Christians now live
outside of the West. 31
The biblical metanarrative helps us see
and experience the true nature of reality, our
role in God's creation, our problem of sin, the
possibility of redemption, and the promise of
restoration. By locating our stories within this
great story, we find meaning and purpose for our
lives. So, if you have stepped into God's great story, what does it look like to participate
in God's story? How do we participate in God's mission for the world? That's what we'll
explore in the next chapter.
ENDNOTES - 3
' Jerram Barrs, Echoes of Eden: Reflections on Christianity, Literature, and the Arts (Wheaton, IL: Crossway,
2013).
2 Alasdair MacIntyre, After Virtue: A Study in Moral Theory, 2nd ed. (Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre
Dame Press, 1984), 216.
3 Eugene H. Peterson, Eat This Book: A Conversation in the Art of Spiritual Reading (Grand Rapids, MI:
Eerdmans, 2006), 62.
* Frederick Buechner, "The Annunciation," in The Magnificent Defeat (New York: HarperCollins, 1985),
59-60.
5 Alister E. McGrath, Narrative Apologetics: Sharing the Relevance, Joy, and Wonder of the Christian Faith
(Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Books, 2019), 9.
6 Lain Provan, Seriously Dangerous Religion: What the Old Testament Really Says and Why it Matters (Waco, TX:
Baylor University Press, 2014), 3.
7 MacIntyre, After Virtue, 216.
8 This chart is adapted from the outline of the biblical metanarrative in Craig G. Bartholomew and Michael
Goheen, The Drama of Scripture: Finding Our Place in the Biblical Story, 2^d ed. (Grand Rapids, MI, Baker,
2014). The titles have been slightly modified, but the descriptions are original. The Drama of Scripture is an
excellent text for understanding the biblical metanarrative in greater depth.
9 Michael W. Goheen, The Church and Its Vocation: Lesslie Newbigin's Missionary Ecclesiology (Grand Rapids,
MI: Baker Academic, 2018), 1, 24-25.
10 Michael Reeves, Delighting in the Trinity: An Introduction to the Christian Faith (Downers Grove, IL:
InterVarsity Press, 2012), 26, 42-44.
"Irenaeus, Against Heresies in The Complete Ante-Nicene & Nicene and Post-Nicene Church Fathers Collections,
ed. Philip Schaff (London: Catholic Way Publishing, 2014), 4.20.7.
12 John Sailhamer, The Pentateuch as Narrative: A Biblical-Theological Commentary (Grand Rapids, MI:
Zondervan, 1992), 103.
13 Provan, Seriously Dangerous Religion, 114.
14 Bible Project, Bad Words Series," BibleProject.com, bibleproject.com/explore/category/bad-words-series/.
15 Evidence for this can be seen in Genesis 9:6, where God outlaws murder because people are made in God's
image.
16 Lesslie Newbigin, The Open Secret: An Introduction to the Theology of Mission, rev. ed. (Grand Rapids, MIl:
Eerdmans, 1995), 32, 68-78.
17 Dean Flemming, Recovering the Full Mission of God: A Biblical Perspective on Being, Doing, and Telling
(Downers Grove, IL: Inter Varsity Press, 2013), 29.
18 Flemming, Recovering the Full Mission of God, 32.
19 This is most likely the origin of the Samaritans who are so frequently at odds with the Jews in the New
Testament (Luke 9:52-54, 10:25-37; John 4:1-42). See Encyclopedia Brittanica, s.v. "Samaritan: Judaism,"
britannica.com/topic/Samaritan.
20 Bartholomew and Goheen, Drama of Scripture, 120-21.
21 N. T. Wright, The New Testament and the People of God, Christians Origins and the Question of God, vol. 1
(Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 1992), 280-338.
22 Fleming Rutledge, The Crucifixion: Understanding the Death of Jesus Christ (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans,
2015), 287.
23 Goheen, The Church and Its Vocation, 61-62.
24 Goheen, The Church and Its Vocation, 59-60.
25 Goheen, The Church and Its Vocation, 46.
26 McGrath, Narrative Apologetics, 13.
27 Peterson, Eat This Book, 40-41.
28 Wright, The New Testament and the People of God, 41-42.
29 Tim Keller, The Reason for God: Belief in an Age of Skepticism (New York: Riverhead Books, 2008), 45.
30 Conrad Hackett and David McClendon, "Christians Remain World's Largest Religious Group, but They
Are Declining in Europe," Pew Research Center, April 5, 2017, pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2017/04/05/
christians-remain-worlds-largest-religious-group-but-they-are-declining-in-europel.
31 Gina A. Zurlo, "Who Owns Global Christianity?," Gordon Conwell Theological Seminary, December 11,
2019, gordonconwell.edu/blog/who-owns-global-christianity/.
CHAPTER 3 53
52 | CHAPTER 3
