# Chapter 4

<!-- page-1 (book p.4) -->

Participating in
God's Story
1. Who You Are Underneath
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to relate the truth of your identity in Christ to the
importance of your actions.
To all appearances, Bruce Wayne is your typical wealthy and spoiled socialite. He lives
a life of luxury—dating supermodels, driving fancy cars, purchasing hotels on a whim,
and burning through money. Yet, all is not as it appears. By day, Bruce Wayne may be a
Gotham City playboy, but at night, he becomes a symbol of dread to criminals. Donning
his black cape and cowl, Bruce Wayne becomes Batman. His two personae eventually
cause him difficulties. In the origin story Batman Begins, a close friend
confronts Wayne for his lavish lifestyle, saying, "I's not who you are
underneath, but what you do that defines you."
Powerful words, but are they true? On the face of it, they seem right—
our actions do say a lot about who we really are, but our actions are not
the whole story. According to Scripture, what defines us is that we are
deeply loved by God and created in his image (Genesis 1:27, 1 John
4:10). As Christians, we are God's children, saved and redeemed by Jesus
(1 John 3:1-2), clothed in the Chris's righteousness (Philippians 3:9),
and filled with the Holy Spirit (Ephesians 5:18).
This truth about our identity becomes all the more important when
we consider what God has called us to do. In the last chapter, we learned that God is on a
mission to bless, redeem, heal, and restore his world. When we put our trust in Jesus, we are
invited to participate with God in his work of redemption and restoration. This begins with
knowing and accepting our identity in Christ. Then, by the power of God's Spirit within us,
the grace we receive overflows into actions of love in the world (Galatians 2:20, Romans 12:21).
So, while our actions do not define us, they do say a lot about the reality of our faith. James
wrote to Christians that faith without works is dead (James 2:14-17), which is to say, it's
not really faith. It is no good for us to say we believe in Jesus, but then to be continually and
carelessly unloving, immoral, and unconcerned about justice, peace, or the salvation of others.
The Bible tells us that God's grace trains us to renounce ungodliness and worldly passions
and shows us how to live in a way that reflects God's glory (Titus 2:11-14). Paul encouraged
the Corinthians to examine themselves to see if their living aligned with what they said they
believed (2 Corinthians 13:5-7).
The Bible is clear—our actions matter. We are not saved for ourselves alone but so that
we might actively engage in God's mission for others' sake. In this chapter, we'll consider
ways to participate in God's mission. We
who place faith in Christ can remember
our identity is grounded in God's love—
nothing can change that.
2. Staying Rooted in
God's Love
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to
differentiate between justification and
sanctification.
A problem with defining ourselves by what
we do is that we can never quite do enough.
Batman may be able to stop one or two
crimes each night, but he cannot be everywhere at once. We, too, are limited. If we see
ourselves primarily in terms of what we do, we'll become disappointed in ourselves, and
it won't be long before we start thinking that God is disappointed in us, too. How can we
avoid this trap of sin and stay rooted in God's love?
G Participating in God's Story
CHAPTER 4 | 55


<!-- page-2 -->

o justificatiolo
the state of
being declared
righteous
before God
through the
work of Jesus
Christ
We begin with the good news that Christianity is not about what we can do for God.
It is about relationship with the triune God. Your relationship with God began before you
were born. In Psalm 139:13-14, the psalmist declares that God "knitted me together in
my mother's womb." Before we saw the light of day, God knew us, loved us, and made us
for relationship with himself. Yet something went wrong. We inherited a condition from
our earliest ancestor that enslaves us to sin (Romans
5:12-21, 6:20). We are alienated from God and unable
to live fully as his image-bearers. We act contrary to
his design, fail to love God, and continually do wrong
(Romans 7:15-17). We are, in a word, "unrighteous"
and incapable of saving ourselves from our own sin.
This condition is shared by every human being (Romans
3:23), and the consequence of our unrighteousness is
eternal separation from God, which can be restored only
through Christ alone (Romans 6:23).
This is why justification is necessary. Justification
is the state of being declared righteous-free from sin and
guilt-before God through the work of Jesus Christ.
Justification was accomplished by Jesus on the cross when he paid the penalty for our
sins and defeated the power of sin and death, freeing us from slavery so we can now live for
God. First Peter 3:18 declares, "For Christ also suffered once for sins, the righteous for the
unrighteous, that he might bring us to God, being put to death in the flesh but made alive
in the spirit." Jesus was fully righteous—without sin in any way—yet he freely and lovingly
laid down his life for his friends (John 15:13). "So now there is no condemnation for those
who belong to Christ Jesus" (Romans 8:1). This justification can be considered a legal term,
a declaration from God that he gives us his righteousness, not because of our works but
because of Christ so that we can have peace with God (Romans 4:5).2
Yet, Christianity does not stop at justification; God intends to help us become all we
were meant to be (Romans 5:1-2). His work in
us continues with sanctification-the process of
becoming like Jesus.
Having trusted Jesus, we now grow deeper in
our relationship with him as we learn to imitate
o sanctification:
the process of becoming
like Jesus
his character and are transformed into his image
(2 Corinthians 3:18). The temptation here is to
think that sanctification is our responsibility.
After being saved by God's grace, we often
shift our focus onto what we can do for God,
thinking perhaps that we can earn his favor or approval by the good things we do. Paul
condemned such thinking when he found it among the Galatian Christians: "O foolish
Galatians! Who has bewitched you? ... Having begun by the Spirit, are you now being
perfected by the flesh?" (Galatians 3:1, 3).
56 | CHAPTER 4
Only by abiding in Jesus can we bear fruit in the Christian life John 15:4-11). The
Holy Spirit within us is the agent of sanctification, and we respond as he completes this
work in us. (Philippians 2:1, 1:6). Our role is to cooperate with him by letting it become
a habit to live like someone who is clothed in the righteousness of Christ and empowered
by the Holy Spirit to do so? This can happen through spiritual disciplines such as reading
Scripture, praying, worshipping, and giving. In these practices, we place ourselves where
we can experience the Father's love more deeply and grow in our relationship with him.
Sanctification begins when we put our trust in Christ and continues throughout our lives
through our daily decisions to seek the Lord, yield to him, and separate ourselves from sin.*
A solid foundation in a loving relationship with God is essential for those called to
participate in God's mission. We are loved and accepted by God, and when we trust this
is true, we can serve him with freedom and joy, knowing our actions don't determine our
status before him.
3. Remembering Our True Story
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to explain two ways to remember the biblical story.
Our world is in desperate need. It is rife with chaos, injustice, and other evils. As one classic
hymn says, "the whole world [is] lost in the darkness of sin." As agents on God's mission,
we are called to bring the good news into this messy world. However, we sometimes
mistakenly think saving the world (or even
just our neighbor) is up to us.
Secular culture reinforces this narrative
by telling a story in which we are the
heroes and God is, at best, marginal or
irrelevant—meaning solving the world's
problems is up to us. This is the crushing
burden that Bruce Wayne bears as Batman.
In Gotham City, the traditional structures
of government and law have failed, so
Batman takes justice into his own hands.
Yet, repeatedly, he is shown to be incapable
of saving Gotham.
Like Batman, with the best intentions, humans have gathered up their resources,
pursued various strategies, and mounted numerous campaigns to save the world. But
history has repeatedly shown humans are incapable of fixing the world on our own. In the
quest to do so, we quickly find ourselves burned out and discouraged. Meanwhile, God
invites us to serve him by being a part of what only God can do.
We need to remember the true biblical story of which we are a part. In this story,
God is the primary Actor-Creator, Sustainer, Redeemer, Judge, Healer, and Friend.
While we are called to join in God's mission, we are not its initiators, nor can we bring it
to completion. We are participants with God, or as Paul puts it, "ambassadors for Christ"
(2 Corinthians 5:20). Being a lone ambassador in a foreign country could be a daunting
CHAPTER 4 | 57


<!-- page-3 -->

& creed:
a statement
expressing
the beliefs
of a religious
community
prospect, but this is not the case for us. As individual Christians, we are called together
into the church —the body of Christ. We work together to proclaim the gospel through
word and deed.
Many churches help us remember our true story by regularly reciting a creed. From
a Latin word meaning "I believe," a creed is simply a statement expressing the beliefs of a
religious community.
The Apostles Creed, found in Appendix A of this textbook, is one of the oldest
Christian creeds. While the title suggests this creed descended from the teachings of the
earliest apostles, this creed gradually developed into its current form
between AD 200 and 750.° One purpose of the Apostles Creed is to
reflect the fundamental teachings of Jesus and the apostles and serve
as a teachable summary of the Christian story. These essential truths
remind us Christianity is first and foremost about God. Each statement
in the creed points not to human accomplishments but to what God has
done for the world (creating and saving it, forming the church, offering
forgiveness) and what he will do in times ahead (bringing judgment and
making all things right). As members of Christ's church, we embrace
these truths that bind us together in the unity of our shared beliefs.
They remind us we aren't starting a new thing; we are involved in
something already happening. According to apologist Alister McGrath,
the Apostles Creed "allows us to recognize and avoid inadequate or
incomplete versions of Christianity [by] providing a balanced and
biblical approach to the Christian faith, tried and tested by believers down through the
centuries."
Another way to remember the Christian story is to pray the Lord's Prayer that Jesus
taught in Matthew 6:9-13. By doing so, we acknowledge the arrival of the kingdom is
God's work, not ours. We pray for God's will to be done and we rely on his grace. In the
meantime, we share the news of his kingdom—like heralds who announce the good news
of God's love and invite people to give their trust and allegiance to him. We are a part of a
much bigger story with eternal purpose.
When we live with the biblical story in mind, we can work freely and confidently,
knowing that "in the Lord [our] labor is not in vain" (1 Corinthians 15:58) and, one day,
God will set all things right (Revelation 21:3-5).
4. Christian Mission Being, Doing, and Telling
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to summarize three ways to participate in God's
mission.
How do we participate in God's mission? In this section, we'll consider two metaphors
for mission—salt and light—and three categories through which we participate in God's
mission-being, doing, and telling.®
Jesus told his disciples they were "the salt of the earth" (Matthew 5:13). Salt flavors
and preserves-before refrigeration, people rubbed salt into meat to keep it from spoiling.
This metaphor suggests that Jesus' disciples help preserve communities from total
corruption and offer "kingdom seasoning" to this world? Salt, known for its imperishable
qualities, also provides cleansing potential. Jesus called his disciples to be salt and to be
faithful in this mission.'® Jesus also called his disciples "the light of the world" (Matthew
5:14). In a world of sin and darkness, Jesus' disciples hold forth the light of the gospel for
all to see. The light is the loving words and deeds and the way we reflect Christ in our lives
for others to see him, not us.
Mission as being. God chose Israel for others' sake in the same way Christ chose his
disciples for others' sake. Israel was to be a kingdom of priests among the nations Exodus
19:6), and 1 Peter 2:9 declares, "But you are a chosen people, a royal priesthood, a holy
nation, God's special possession, that you may declare the praises of him who called you
out of darkness into his wonderful light." Though there was a specific priestly class, all
of God's people are, in a sense, called to be priests—to help foster relationship between
God and humans. "Israel's task [was] primarily to be a God-shaped community before the
nations" through lives lived in obedient relationship with God."
So, too, the New Testament church is to be a distinctive community shaped by Jesus'
love. This distinctive love is our greatest witness (John 13:35). The way that we live with
and among other believers-loving, serving, and forgiving one another—demonstrates
Jesus' transformative power to the world. We first participate in God's mission is by being
like Jesus, letting our lives be shaped by God's character and commands.
Mission as doing. Another crucial element in our mission is our outward actions. In
Isaiah 58, God drew attention to Israel's
failure. The people had fasted while
simultaneously oppressing their workers,
fighting, and seeking their own pleasure.
God told them that a true fast is more than
a religious ritual. Their commitment to God
needed to show in their actions-freeing
the oppressed, offering hospitality to the
homeless, and feeding the poor.
As Christians, our faith should translate
into action (Ephesians 2:10, James 1:22). For
James, pure religion is evident in our care
for the poor, disadvantaged, and bereaved.
It also requires keeping "oneself unstained from the world" James 1:27). This means
that Christians will do good to others and refrain from evil, all the while seeking to
demonstrate the character of Christ in all their dealings.
Mission as telling. Last but not least, mission involves telling—a clear presentation of
and invitation to accept Christ's death for the forgiveness of our sins. Just as our words
have little effect if they are not accompanied by actions, being and doing are incomplete
without the telling. In the Old Testament, there are not many instances of Israelites
CHAPTER 4 | 59
58 | CHAPTER 4
APOLOGETICS 5
9 Participating in God's Story


<!-- page-4 -->

Christ gives
the Great
Commission, St.
Patrick's Church,
Dundalk, Ireland
60 | CHAPTER 4
evangelizing. We know God instructed his people to welcome strangers in their land
(Leviticus 19:33-34) so they could see the relationship of God with his people. By Jesus' day,
there were God-fearing Gentiles living among Israelites who probably learned about God
in everyday conversation with Israelites.
In the New Testament, we see a stronger emphasis on telling. After declaring that
"everyone who calls on the name of the Lord will be saved" (Romans 10:13), Paul asks:
And how are they to believe in him of whom they have never heard?
And how are they to hear without someone preaching?... So faith comes from
hearing, and hearing through the word of Christ. —Romans 10:14, 17
In presenting the gospel, we invite people into God's great story. Because Scripture's
metanarrative is about the whole world, it is truly everyone's story, though many may
never have heard it or have perhaps forgotten it!? We hope to persuade people to be
reconciled to God through our telling.
5. Evangelism, Discipleship, and Missions
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to relate evangelism, discipleship, and missions to
the Great Commission.
In the first chapter, we looked at the Great Commission, in which Jesus told his disciples:
"Go therefore and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the
Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, teaching them to observe all that I have
commanded you." —Matthew 28:19-20
At least three activities are stated or implied
in this command-evangelism, discipleship,
and missions.
Evangelism. While evangelism is not
specifically mentioned in the Great
Commission, it is clearly implied. In Chapter
1, we defined evangelism as sharing the
good news about Jesus and inviting people
to respond with faith. According to veteran
evangelist Rico Tice, the message that we have
to share with people in evangelism can be
broken down into three categories: who Jesus
is (God incarnate, King, Messiah, and Savior),
why Jesus came (to atone for our sins, defeat evil, and rescue us from sin and death) and
what Jesus wants from us (to trust in him, die to ourselves, and experience true life as his
gift) 3
So, evangelism goes beyond merely informing people about Jesus. "It is communication
with a view toward conversion."' If we are to evangelize in Jesus' way, we need to be
interested in more than just winning converts. Speaking with someone about sin and
APOLOGETICS G
salvation addresses some of the deepest, most intimate places of a person's life, so it must
be done lovingly. To speak about these matters with someone is a privilege that often
needs to be earned! That means showing
genuine concern for the other person, speaking
graciously and humbly, building rapport, and
developing friendships (when possible) to keep
the conversation going.
Discipleship. Notice that in the Great
Commission, Jesus did not command his
disciples, "Go ... and make converts." Instead,
he called them to "make disciples." This means
our participation in God's mission does not
cease when someone places his or her faith in
6 discipleship:
a relationship
in which one
Christian helps
other Christians
grow in
knowledge, love,
and obedience
to Jesus
Jesus. We must continue to participate in the
growth of that person. A disciple is a learner or pupil. So, for Christians, discipleship
is a relationship in which one Christian helps other Christians grow in knowledge, love, and
obedience to Jesus.
Discipleship can happen in church, small group settings, or one-on-one conversations.
Discipleship involves instruction in the knowledge of God and much more. The disciple
also learns how to pattern his or her life after Jesus and how to love others. Jesus' disciples
had the opportunity as his followers "to listen, to watch, and to be amazed at what the
Son of God did in their presence."'6 We have the same opportunity. As one author puts it,
discipleship is "education ... that translates into action." Usually, one of the first acts of a
disciple is baptism—a public declaration of allegiance to Jesus, dying to sin, and rising to
new life in Christ.
Missions. The Great Commission says we
are to make disciples of "all nations." This
d missions:
an activity whereby
one person or group
enters a specific
culture in order to
share the gospel and
make disciples
is the work of missions and missionaries.
Missions is to be distinguished from
mission. By mission, we mean the mission
of God-God's plan to bless, redeem, and
restore creation. Missions, on the other
hand, are an activity whereby one person
or group enters a specific culture in order to
share the gospel and make disciples!&
Missions have a long history in the
church, beginning in the book of Acts
when the disciples spread out from Judea to take the gospel to the ends of the earth.
Today, the gospel has penetrated nearly every corner of the globe. Missionaries are sent
just as often from East to West as from West to East. Yet, missions are not limited to those
who travel to foreign countries. Anyone who takes the gospel to a specific cultural context
(such as a particular block in a city, a group of non-natives living in a foreign land, or an
interest group) may be considered a missionary.
S Participating in God's Story
CHAPTER 4 | 61


<!-- page-5 -->

Philip and
the Ethiopian
Eunuch, fresco
by Herbert
Boecki, Seckau
Abbey, Styria,
Austria
62 | CHAPTER 4
6. Evangelism, Discipleship, and Missions in
Action
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to analyze biblical examples of evangelism,
discipleship, and missions in action.
With these definitions, let's look at some examples of people in Scripture who practiced
evangelism, discipleship, and missions."
Evangelism in action. According to the Gospels, the first evangelists after the
resurrection of Jesus were the women who came to the tomb—Mary Magdalene,
Mary the mother of James, Joanna, Salome, and possibly others. The angel at the tomb
commissioned them to "go quickly and tell his disciples that he has risen from the dead,"
(Matthew 28:7), which they promptly proceeded to
do (see also Luke 24:4-10, John 20:16-18. Note Mark
records their initial silence). These women gave witness
to what they had seen and heard, with expressions
such as, "I have seen the Lord" (John 20:18). Simply
sharing with others about our experience with Jesus is
a significant part of evangelism.
Another example of evangelism is the story of
Philip and the Ethiopian eunuch in Acts 8:26-40.
On a desert highway to Gaza, Philip, one of Jesus'
disciples, encountered a high court official of Candace,
queen of the Ethiopians. The official was reading from
the prophet Isaiah. Following the Holy Spirit's lead,
Philip engaged him with a simple question: "Do you understand what you are reading?"
The Ethiopian expressed curiosity about a particular passage. Philip used the passage to tell
him about Jesus. This story illustrates the evangelistic opportunities of listening to the Holy
Spirit and engaging people with questions.
These stories serve as prime examples of what author George Barna aptly terms "organic
evangelism —the process of sharing one's faith in Christ in very natural and unforced ways,
based on relationships with the recipients of the information and supported by lifestyle
modeling "20
Discipleship in action. One famous illustration of discipleship is the story of Mary
of Bethany, sister of Martha and Lazarus (Luke 10:38-42). While Jesus was at their
house, Mary "sat at the Lord's feet and listened to his teaching" (Luke 10:39). To sit at
someone's feet is the posture of a disciple.?' Whatever Jesus was saying, Mary was taking
it all in, even though there were many other good things she could have been doing (as
Martha observed). Jesus recognized Mary as a humble learner and commended her for
attentiveness to him.
Another illustration of discipleship comes from the book of Revelation. Living in
exile on the island of Patmos, John, a missionary and pastor, did not forget about the
Christians he was responsible for shepherding. They were facing tremendous pressure to
give up distinctive ways of being Christian so they could fit in and avoid persecution. John
discipled them in faithfulness to Jesus. Using vivid imagery and symbolism, he taught
them about the kingdom, God's sovereign power and justice, and the world-changing
sacrifice of the Lamb of God.
In these examples, discipleship was characterized by a deep love for Jesus and a
devotion to his Word. The disciples gave God authority over their lives and submitted to
his leadership in their everyday decisions. And finally, they reflected Christ's love in their
attitudes and actions toward others. These are the marks of a true disciple of Christ.?
Missions in action. The earliest converts to Christianity were Jews who recognized Jesus
as the long-awaited Messiah and the fulfillment of God's promises to Israel. The good
news would soon spread beyond Jewish borders to the Gentiles. The catalyst for this
missionary activity is recounted in Acts 10. There, Peter received an unusual vision and
a surprising invitation to take the gospel to the Gentile centurion Cornelius. Marveling
that the Gentiles, too, were included in God's salvation plan, Peter opened his mouth and
explained the gospel, which was followed by an outpouring of the Holy Spirit. Soon, the
gospel spread to Gentile audiences all across the Mediterranean.
A second illustration of missions is found in Acts 18. After being expelled from
Rome because he was a Jew, Aquila and his wife, Priscilla, settled in Corinth, where
they continued their trade as tentmakers. Soon after, Paul came and stayed in their
house while establishing the church in Corinth. When Paul left for Ephesus, Priscilla
and Aquila traveled with him and helped establish a church in Ephesus. There, they
were instrumental in discipling the great preacher Apollos. Through simple hospitality
and concern for others, Priscilla and Aquila showed how ordinary believers can become
missionaries for Jesus.
7. Apologetics
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to explain three roles of apologetics.
What purpose does apologetics have in the mission of God? While apologetics is distinct
from evangelism, discipleship, and missions, it has a vital role in all these activities. In
Chapter 1, we learned that apologetics
is the art of defending, commending,
and translating the Christian faith. Let's
examine what this definition means to a
disciple, an evangelist, and a missionary.
Defending the faith. First Peter 3:15
says, "But in your hearts honor Christ the
Lord as holy, always being prepared to
make a defense to anyone who asks you
for a reason for the hope that is in you; yet do it with gentleness and respect." Peter wrote
to Christians facing persecution. When their faith in Jesus came under fire, they needed
CHAPTER 4 | 63


<!-- page-6 -->

to be prepared to give a gentle and respectful apologia (defense) to their critics. Warning
against false teachers, Jude similarly urged Christians to "contend for the faith" Jude 1:3).
So, the defensive aspect of apologetics involves both offering justification for your beliefs
and defending the gospel against false teaching.
While distinct from evangelism, apologetics can be a precursor to evangelism.2 Some
people may simply be curious about why we are Christians. Others will have unanswered
questions that prevent them from trusting Jesus. Still others may be openly hostile to
Christianity. Apologists can help clear the ground for evangelism to all these people by
respectfully listening to their questions—"How do you know Christianity is true?" "How
can God allow evil?" "Why does God care what I do with my body?" —and gently offering
reasonable, relevant, and desirable responses. 4
Commending the faith. To commend something is to favorably hold it up for someone's
consideration or scrutiny. For example, someone might commend a particular movie to
you by showering it with praise and saying things like, "You have to see this!" The task
of commending the faith is a proactive or constructive approach to apologetics.? To
commend the faith is to offer it to others, showing it to be good, true, and beautiful. This
may be especially important in discipleship. Apologetics can reawaken Christians to the
beauty of the gospel or strengthen their faith by showing how true and transformative it is.
Commending the faith also happens whenever we share our experiences of Jesus' grace
in our lives. When commending, the apologist may not be answering any specific question
or objection but simply holding up some aspect of Christianity, offering sound arguments,
and inviting others to examine or experience it for themselves. Take the resurrection as an
example. We might commend it to others by explaining how the resurrection is good news,
offering evidence that it actually happened, and illustrating its impact on our lives.
Translating the faith. By translating, we do
Communicate in
a manner that your
audience will be
able to understand.
not necessarily mean translating the gospel
into a foreign language—say, from Greek
to Spanish-though this may be part of
what apologetics involves. Instead, we mean
communicating in a manner that our audience
will be able to understand. In Christian circles,
we frequently use terms like image of God, sin,
or gospel on the assumption that we all know
what they mean. But we cannot assume anyone
will understand our Christian jargon when we
get outside the church doors.
We must get to a people's language and culture before we can share the gospel in a way
that will resonate with them. This is not only critical for effective communication, it also
forces us to examine our own beliefs more carefully. C. S. Lewis pointedly observed that
the "power to translate is the test of having really understood your own meaning." 26 So, if
you cannot translate your theology into a language that others can understand, you don't
really understand your theology.
8. Apologetics in Action
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to describe how defending, commending, and
translating the faith are illustrated in the Bible.
Having grasped some of the basic tasks of apologetics, le's now consider a few examples of
apologetic encounters in Scripture.
Defending in action. In Luke 7:18-23, some disciples of John the Baptist approached
Jesus to ask if he was really the Messiah. John apparently had some doubts about the
matter, so he sent his disciples to talk to Jesus
about it. In defense of who he was, Jesus pointed
to his miracles: "Go and tell John what you have
seen and heard: the blind receive their sight, the
lame walk, lepers are cleansed, and the deaf hear,
the dead are raised up, the poor have good news
preached to them." For Jesus, these miracles were
evidence that he was the Messiah and that the
kingdom of God was indeed arriving.
In Peter's day, many people thought the gospel
was a lot of nonsense. So, when Peter wrote to the
churches, he made a point of letting them know
he wasn't making it all up. "For we did not follow cleverly devised myths when we made
known to you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but we were eyewitnesses
of his majesty" (2 Peter 1:16). Peter defended his claims by pointing to eyewitness
testimony-both his own and that of his fellow disciples.
Commending in action. Shortly after becoming a disciple of Jesus, Philip found
Nathanael and excitedly told him, "We have found him of whom Moses in the Law and
also the prophets wrote, Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph." This is an enormous claim,
and it is perhaps not surprising that Nathanael was a little skeptical. "Can anything good
come out of Nazareth?" he asked. Surprisingly, Philip did not attempt to argue with
Nathanael. Instead, he simply told him to "come and see" (John 1:45-46). As apologists,
inviting people to "come and see" Jesus for themselves is one of the most powerful
invitations we can extend.
Acts 9:36-43 tells the story of a disciple named Tabitha. Before her untimely death,
Tabitha commended the faith to others through her "good works and acts of charity,"
especially toward widows. When Peter arrived to raise her back to life, many widows came
and showed him all the things that Tabitha had made for them. We don't know if or
how Tabitha verbally commended the faith, but we know that through good deeds in her
community, she held up the beauty and transformative power of the gospel.
Translating in action. It might sound odd, but the genealogy of Jesus in Matthew 1:1-17
is a clear example of translation at work. For the Jews to whom Matthew was writing,
64 | CHAPTER 4
APOLOGETICS G
S Participating in God's Story
Peter raises
Tabitha, detail,
1652, by Louis
Testelin, Arras,
France
CHAPTER 4 | 65


<!-- page-7 -->

genealogies were crucial in establishing a sense of identity. Matthew traces Jesus' family
tree with particular emphasis on the fact that Jesus is the legal son of David. Since the
promised Messiah would come from the line of David, any Jew would have found this
lineage "impressive and compelling."2 Matthew's genealogy is a bold proclamation that
Jesus is the true King and Messiah. Matthew knew what would get his readers' attention.
Jesus' parables are another example of
translation. When speaking about complex
realities like the kingdom of God, sin, and
salvation, Jesus illustrated these truths with
the stuff of everyday life. He talked about lost
coins, sheep, mustard seeds, and wedding feasts,
all familiar to ordinary people. Of course, the
parables also had a catch. For those who were open
to Jesus' message and willing to hear, the parables
would teach them about the kingdom of God in a
way they could understand. However, for those who were hostile and stubbornly refused to
listen to Jesus, the parables would actually conceal the truth (Matthew 13:10-17).
9. Learning from Paul
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to give examples of how the apostle Paul modeled
apologetics.
Before we conclude this chapter, let's take a closer look at how Paul participated in God's
mission. As we will see, Paul did not have a one-size-fits-all apologetic method. He
tailored his message to his audience.
Paul's sermon at Antioch in Pisidia (Acts 13:13-43). On the Sabbath day, Paul and
Barnabas entered the synagogue. After seeing that they respectfully listened to the
reading of Scripture, the local leaders invited Paul and Barnabas to speak a message of
encouragement. Paul proceeded to give a sermon in which he recounted some of the most
memorable events in Jewish history. He then argued that Jesus of Nazareth was God's
appointed Messiah who fulfilled the Scriptures and the law of Moses. Paul defended his
claim by drawing attention to Jesus resurrection, which proved that he was the Messiah,
the true son of David. Notice that Paul gained the trust of the synagogue elders through
his respectful behavior. He then tailored his message to his audience. The synagogue
Jews were likely well-versed in the Scriptures, desiring to keep the law of Moses as they
anticipated the Messiah who would come from David's line. Paul spoke directly to
their concerns, using the Scriptures to show them the truth about Jesus. Today, such an
apologetic method is most likely beneficial for those familiar with the Christian story but
may need to have it clarified or explained.
Paul in Athens (Acts 17:16-34). Provoked by rampant idol worship in Athens, Paul
began to reason with the residents in the synagogues and marketplaces. His message
caught the attention of some philosophers who, curious to know more, brought him to
the Areopagus for him to expound his teaching. There, Paul made note of the Athenians'
fervent religious practice. Using the "unknown god" as a bridge to connect with his
audience, Paul "engaged] their worldview and [drew] on their own language, literature,
and images in order to communicate the gospel in ways that [made] sense to them." 2
Since these philosophers were probably unfamiliar with the biblical story, Paul quoted the
famous Athenian poet Aratus to help them understand his message. Paul proclaimed the
true God to them, invited them to seek God, and warned them of the coming judgment.
There is much to learn from Paul's example here. First, we must get to know the culture
of the people we communicate with. What are their beliefs? What symbols and ideas are
important to them? What are their hopes? In discovering answers to these questions, we
can unlock new ways to connect with them. Second, having made these connections, we
can commend the gospel to them in an appealing way, showing it to be genuinely desirable.
Third, as we confront sin and false beliefs, we must be prepared to answer questions and
offer a defense of our beliefs. And fourth, we invite people to respond to what they heard.
Paul's defense before King Agrippa (Acts 26:1-29). Imprisoned for causing an uproar
among the Jews, Paul was brought before King Agrippa to give an account of himself.
In defending himself in this scenario, Paul did not lean heavily on the Scriptures or the
resources of Roman culture. Instead, he simply offered his testimony. He told how he went
from a devout Pharisee who persecuted Christians
to becoming a Christian after a remarkable
encounter with Jesus. Since that day, Paul declared
that he had shared the message that Jesus gave him
with both Jews and Gentiles.
Paul's defense before Agrippa reminds us of the
importance of sharing our personal experiences
with Jesus. Paul appealed to Agrippa's knowledge,
speaking "true and rational words" (Acts 26:25-27),
but he also knew the power a testimony could have.
To share our experience with Jesus is to invite others
into that experience so they can "come and see" for
themselves.
10. Conclusion
In this chapter, we've explored our identity and role in God's mission. We've learned about
our calling as salt and light to share the gospel and embody its message through being,
doing, and telling. We've discovered concrete ways to participate in God's mission through
evangelism, discipleship, missions, and apologetics. We've also seen how biblical characters
engaged in these practices.
We might associate these practices with people like Billy Graham, the great evangelist
of the last century, who shared the gospel with an estimated 215 million people throughout
his lifetime.3° We might associate them with apologists Francis and Edith Schaeffer, who
St. Paul
Preaching at
Athens, 1515,
by Raphael
CHAPTER 4 | 67
66 | CHAPTER 4
© Participating in God's Story


<!-- page-8 (book p.68) -->

Evangelist
Billy Graham
| CHAPTER 4
founded L'Abri Fellowship to help college students work through questions and struggles
with Christianity. God used Graham and the Schaeffers in powerful and unique ways.
Given the tremendous fruit that resulted from their ministry, we might conclude, "I could
never be like that!"
The good news is that you don't have to be. Each Christian is uniquely gifted for
particular tasks in God's mission. For some who are eager and outgoing, verbally sharing
the faith may seem as natural to them as brushing their teeth. For others, sharing the
good news aloud is extremely difficult, even paralyzing. However, these same people
may be especially gifted in acts of mercy that reveal Jesus in everyday life. Some have a
sharp intellect and can confidently defend the faith using reason and logic, while others
commend the faith through their artistic endeavors.
It may be tempting to leave the work of evangelism, discipleship, missions, and
apologetics to people who are particularly gifted in specific ways. Yet, the call to participate
in God's mission was not just given to a few. It was given to all of us,
from the shopkeeper to the CEO. All of us are engaged full-time in
the mission of God, no matter what we do in life. God's mission is not
just accomplished at evangelistic crusades or apologetic conferences. It
is most often (and perhaps most effectively) done on the ground—in
kitchens, street corners, and coffee shops.
Just as you don't need to be a billionaire like Bruce Wayne to make a
difference in the world, neither do you need to be a full-time evangelist
(like Billy Graham) nor the founder of an organization (like the
Schaeffers) to participate in the mission of God. He has a way of using
seemingly small and insignificant people to accomplish his purposes
(1 Corinthians 1:27). In God's eyes, we are all valuable, endowed with
dignity and worth that no amount of action (or inaction) can change.
We are God's beloved children called on mission.
Even so, we might feel inadequate. Satan's lies hold many people firmly in his grip, and
none of us possess the power to transform hearts and minds. Even the most prominent
apologists and evangelists would tell you they felt unfit for the call or unprepared for the
work. What makes evangelism, discipleship, missions, and apologetics so difficult? Where
does the power for mission come from? And what does it look like when that power goes
with us on a mission? That's what we'll explore in the next chapter.
ENDNOTES - 4
' Batman Begins, directed by Christopher Nolan (Warner Bros. Pictures, DC Comics, Legendary Pictures,
Syncopy, Patalex III Productions, 2005).
2 Wayne Grudem, Systematic Theology: An Introduction to Biblical Doctrine (Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan,
2000), 316.
3 Norman L. Geisler and Jason Jimenez, The Bible's Answers to 100 of Life's Biggest Questions (Grand Rapids,
MI: Baker Books, 2015), 171.
4 Ron Rhodes, A Popular Survey of Apologetics for Today: Fast Facts Every Christian Should Know (Eugene,
Oregon: Harvest House Publishers, 2023), 292.
5 "The Light of the World Is Jesus," by Philip Paul Bliss. In Calvary Songs: A Collection of New and Choice
Hymns and Tunes for Sunday Schools and Families (Philadelphia: American Sunday School Union, 1875),
30-31.
6 Grudem, Systematic Theology, 586.
- Alister McGrath, Apostles Creed: 6 Studies for Individuals or Groups. Life Guide Bible Studies (Downers
Grove, IL: IVP Connect, 2016), 6.
& The paradigm of "being, doing, and telling" is from Dean Flemming, Recovering the Full Mission of God: A
Biblical Perspective on Being, Doing, and Telling (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 2013), 61-86.
9 Michael J. Wilkins, The NIV Application Commentary: Matthew (Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2004),
212.
10 Dietrich Bonhoeffer, The Cost of Discipleship (New York, NY: Simon & Schuster, 1995), 116.
" Flemming, Full Mission of God, 29.
12 Richard John Neuhaus, "Telling the World Its Own Story," Wilberforce Forum July 2001).
13 Rico Tice with Carl Laferton, Honest Evangelism: How To Talk about Jesus Even When It's Tough (Charlotte,
NC: The Good Book Company, 2015), 72-81.
14 J. I. Packer, Evangelism and the Sovereignty of God (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, 1991), 50.
15 Packer, Evangelism and Sovereignty, 81.
16 George Barna, Growing True Disciples: New Strategies for Producing Genuine Followers of Christ (Colorado
Springs, CO: Waterbrook Press, 2001), 18.
17 Tyler Wigg-Stevenson, The World Is Not Ours to Save: Finding the Freedom to Do Good (Downers Grove, IL:
InterVarsity Press, 2013), 121.
18 Christopher J. H. Wright makes a similar distinction about the terms mission and missionary in his seminal
book The Mission of God: Unlocking the Bible's Grand Narrative (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press,
2006), 22-23.
19 Since we define evangelism, discipleship, missions, and apologetics primarily in relation to Jesus, we have
restricted our examples here (and in Chapter 4.8) to the New Testament; however, it is possible to find
comparable examples of these activities in the Old Testament as well.
20 Barna, Growing True Disciples, 5.
21 Scot McKnight, The Jesus Creed: Loving God, Loving Others (Brewster, MA: Paraclete Press, 2004), 193.
22 Mark Bailey, To Follow Him: The Seven Marks of a Disciple (Sisters, OR: Multnomah Publishers, Inc),
1997), 28.
23 Alister E. McGrath, Mere Apologetics: How to Help Seekers and Skeptics Find Faith (Grand Rapids, MI:
Baker Books, 2012), 21.
24 Paul M. Gould, Cultural Apologetics: Renewing the Christian Voice, Conscience, and Imagination in a
Disenchanted World (Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2019), 24-25.
25 James K. Beilby, Thinking about Christian Apologetics: What It Is and Why We Do It (Downers Grove, IL:
InterVarsity Press, 2011), 15.
26 C. S. Lewis, "Christian Apologetics," C. S. Lewis Essay Collection (London: HarperCollins, 2000), 153,
155, as referenced in McGrath, Mere Apologetics, 20.
27 N. T. Wright, Matthew for Everyone: Part 1, Chapters 1-15 (Louisville, KY: Westminster John Knox Press,
2004), 2.
28 Flemming, Full Mission of God, 143.
2 McGrath, Mere Apologetics, 64-65.
30 Estimate taken from "Billy Graham," Samaritan's Purse, samaritanspurse.org/media/bio-billy-graham.
CHAPTER 4 | 69
