# Chapter 6

<!-- page-1 -->

ENDNOTES - 5
' The dating and details of the deaths of apostles Peter and Paul are based on the traditions handed down by
the early church. See Justo L. González, The Story of Christianity, Volume 1: The Early Church to the Dawn of
the Reformation (New York: HarperCollins, 2010), 43-46.
2 Philip Kosloski, "Are There More Martyrs Now than in the Early Church?" Aleteia, June 30, 2017, aleteia.
org/2017/06/30/are-there-more-martyrs-now-than-in-the-early-church/.
3 World Watch List 2023," Open Doors USA, opendoors.org/en-US/persecution/countries/.
* Frances Chan, Forgotten God (Colorado Springs, CO: David C. Cook, 2009), 46.
5 Chan, 68.
6]. I. Packer, Knowing God (Downers Grove, IL: Inter Varsity Press, 1973), 118.
7 David Platt, Follow Me: A Call to Die. A Call to Live (Carol Stream, Illinois: Tyndale Momentum, 2013), 35.
8 The illustrations that follow were inspired by a model utilized by Lesslie Newbigin in The Open Secret:
An Introduction to the Theology of Mission, rev. ed. (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 1995), 180-82. The
succeeding explanation, along with the example of Peter and Cornelius, were also drawn or heavily inspired
by Newbigin's work.
'Dane Ortlund, Gentle and Lowly: The Heart of Christ for Sinners and Sufferers (Wheaton, IL: Crossway,
2020), 75.
1° Louie Giglio, Not Forsaken: Finding Freedom as Sons & Daughters of a Perfect Father (Nashville, TN: B&H
Publishing Group, 2019), 25.
" Dietrich Bonhoeffer, The Cost of Discipleship (New York: Touchstone, 1995), 185.
12 Wayne Grudem, Bible Doctrine: Essential Teachings of the Christian Faith (Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan,
1999), 159.
13 Fasting as a way of engaging in spiritual warfare was practiced by many biblical characters—such as Esther,
Daniel, and Jesus—and by numerous Christians throughout the history of the church. It may be appropriate
to fast in preparation for sharing the gospel to physically remind ourselves of our dependence on God.
However, fasts (especially from food) should only be undertaken after consulting with parents, doctors, and
wise mentors. Not everyone physically can or should engage in a fast.
"J. P. Moreland, Love Your God with All Your Mind: The Role of Reason in the Life of the Soul (Colorado
Springs, CO: NavPress, 1997), 39.
15 Saint Augustine, On Christian Teaching, trans. R. P. H. Green (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008),
Book II.XVII, 47.
16 Grudem, Bible Doctrine, 273-279.
17 C. S. Lewis, Mere Christianity (New York: HarperCollins, 1952), 78.
18 The topic of the Holy Spirit's guidance is discussed in Foundations, Book II of the Understanding the
Times Series (Manitou Springs, CO: Summit Ministries, 2023), 203-207.
19 Many thanks to our friend Thomas Carlson for his help crafting the preceding approach's outline.
20 Ron Rhodes, A Popular Survey of Apologetics for Today: Fast Facts Every Christian Should Know (Eugene,
Oregon: Harvest House Publishers, 2023), 24.
21 Jerram Barrs, Learning Evangelism from Jesus (Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2009), 37.
22 Tim Keller, Encounters with Jesus: Unexpected Answers to Life's Biggest Questions (New York, NY: Dutton,
2013), 25-26.
23 Barrs, Learning Evangelism from Jesus, 42.
24 Andreas J. Köstenberger, Encountering John: The Gospel in Historical, Literary, and Theological Perspective,
2nd ed. (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2013), 73.
25 Barrs, Learning Evangelism from Jesus, 38.
26 Keller, Encounters with Jesus, 27, 30.
27 D. A. Carson, The Gospel According to John (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 1991), 230-31.
28 Greg Koukl, "A Stone in His Shoe," Stand to Reason, February 21, 2013, str.org/w/a-stone-in-his-shoe. See
also Gregory Koukl, Tactics: A Game Plan for Discussing Your Christian Convictions, 10th anniv. ed. (Grand
Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2019).
Logic and Love
1. A Reason to Reason
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to defend the importance of reasoning well.
In Lewis Carroll's masterpiece Alice's Adventures in Wonderland, a young girl named
Alice finds herself lost in a bizarre fantasy land where she has a series of mind-boggling
encounters. One of the most puzzling is her conversation with the Cheshire Cat.
"Cheshire Puss ... Would you tell me, please, which way I ought to go from here?"
"That depends a good deal on where you want to get to," said the Cat.
86 | CHAPTER 5


<!-- page-2 -->

Alice and the
Cheshire Cat,
19th century
lithograph by
John Tenniel
88 | CHAPTER 6
"I don't much care where—" said Alice.
"Then it doesn't matter which way you go," said the Cat.
"—so long as I get somewhere," Alice added as an explanation.
"Oh, you're sure to do that," said the Cat, "if you only walk long enough?"
Alice felt that this could not be denied, so she tried another question. "What sort of
people live about here?"
"In that direction," the Cat said, waving its right paw round,
"lives a Hatter: and in that direction," waving the other paw,
"lives a March Hare. Visit either you like: they're both mad."
"But I don't want to go among mad people," Alice remarked.
"Oh, you can't [sic] help that," said the Cat: "we're all mad
here. I'm mad. You're mad."
"How do you know I'm mad?" said Alice.
"You must be," said the Cat, "or you wouldn't
have come here."
Alice didn't think that proved it at all; however, she
went on. "And how do you know that you're mad?"
"To begin with," said the Cat, "a dog's not mad.
You grant that?"
"I suppose so," said Alice.
"Well, then," the Cat went on, "you see a dog growls
when it's angry, and wags its tail when it's pleased. Now I
growl when I'm pleased, and wag my tail when I'm angry.
Therefore, I'm mad.")
Before Alice has time to think this through, the Cheshire Cat abruptly changes the
subject, after which the conversation quickly (and quite literally) dissolves. Throughout
the book a confused Alice will converse with a whole cast of strange characters, all of
which tax her reasoning faculty to the limit. Because Alice cannot make much sense of
her experience through reason, she is utterly at a loss for what to do throughout most of
the story.
Readers can sympathize with Alice's frustration. Wonderland offers an almost
unending stream of logical puzzles and absurdities. Few of us would want to stay long
among its hopelessly muddled, mad inhabitants. Sometimes, life can feel a bit like
Wonderland. We feel lost and unable to navigate. Conversations and debates are often
racked with confusion caused by faulty reasoning and logical missteps. Many arguments
for and against Christianity bypass reason, appealing instead to our likes, weaknesses,
prejudices, or desires. This is often done accidentally or without malice, but not everyone
plays fair. Some intentionally use rhetoric to manipulate and control others. Others coldly
use assertions and repetition to pound their opponents into agreement. And even when
arguments are used correctly and with the best intentions, they can be hard to follow.
Thankfully, God has given us the gift of reason to help us navigate the world of
communication and to discern truth from error. Apologetics connects the gospel with
the human experience " with reason, with the emotions, and with the imagination."
Reasoning is a human's ability to gain understanding through using the senses,
perceptions, knowledge, and emotions? Reason allows us to examine if something
indicates a logical claim of truth. C. S. Lewis sums it up, "For me, reason is the natural
organ of truth; but imagination is the organ of meaning." By learning to reason well,
we demonstrate love for God and our neighbors, growing our capacity to make sound
arguments, think critically, spot logical errors, and ask good questions. By reasoning well,
we can treat others fairly as we speak truth and engage wisely in the spiritual battle to see
people set free in Christ. Reason is one tool we can use to help those who feel lost in a
"wonderland" of confusion discover the truth. That's what this chapter is all about.
2. Logically Speaking
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to support the need for logic and discern the
difference between deductive and inductive arguments.
Let's begin by exploring logic, the study of orderly thinking and the principles of reasoning.
The primary function of logic is to help us distinguish between strong and weak
reasoning. It is perfectly logical when the Cheshire Cat tells Alice that it doesn't matter
which way she goes if she doesn't care where she ends up. But Alice remains unconvinced
when the Cheshire Cat tells her she must be mad or she wouldn't have come to
Wonderland. Logically, madness is only one of many possible reasons why Alice is in
Wonderland. So, in this case, the Cheshire
Cat's reasoning is weak.
Like Alice, when confronted with new
ideas, we can use our ability to think and
& logic:
the study of orderly thinking
and the principles of reasoning
evaluate this new information. "One of the
primary ways to grow in our ability to think
critically is... in using the principles of logic
IDED
to evaluate ideas." With each new idea, we
consider various possible reasons and move
toward a conclusion.
Christians believe God is, among other
things, rational and logical. While Jesus was
on Earth, he regularly used reason and logic to
converse with others. He offered justification
for many of his claims and challenged people to think carefully (Matthew 16:13-16).
Because humans are made in God's image, we are capable of rational thought. As followers
of Jesus, we are called to love God with our heart, soul, and mind (Matthew 22:37), and
to engage with others in a reasonable way.
CHAPTER 6 | 89


<!-- page-3 (book p.91) -->

In life, we are bound by the laws of logic just as we are bound by the law of gravity. The
laws of logic, also called principles, guide the way we evaluate the relationship between
two statements or ideas. Are the statements true or are they false? How will we know?
Take the law of noncontradiction as an example.
The law of noncontradiction says a proposition
o law of noncontradiction:
a proposition cannot be both
true and not true at the same
time and in the same sense
TRUE NOT
TRUE
cannot be both true and not true at the same time
and in the same sense.
Consider two statements: "The current year is
2025" and "The current year is not 2025." Because
these statements are contradictory, both cannot
be true at the same time and in the same sense.
This law is inescapable. We are bound to live by
and recognize it to make sense of the world. The
principles of logic also tell us that a statement is
either true or false but cannot be both. And logic
prevails when the identity of an object remains the object's identity, even if different words
are used for it? The principles of logic point to the truth because "a true contradiction is
impossible."
This is how the principles of logic help us formulate conclusions and outline the reasons
that support those conclusions. This is the science of argumentation. An argument may be
defined as a set of premises supporting a conclusion?
In this sense, an argument is not a fight but rather an attempt by one person to reach
a conclusion by offering various reasons or statements that support it. In logic, there are
two main types of arguments: deductive and inductive. In a deductive argument, the
conclusion is deduced from the premises—that is, if the premises are true, the conclusion
must be true. A deductive argument is a certainty that cannot be changed with new
information.'° These types of arguments often take the form of a syllogism, which is an
argument that has two premises that support a conclusion. For example:
Premise 1: All men are mortal.
Premise 2: Socrates is a man.
Conclusion: Therefore, Socrates is mortal.
In evaluating arguments like
this, logicians distinguish between
the terms valid and sound. A valid
argument is an argument that
is properly formed with logical
structure-the conclusion must
follow from the premises. A sound
D
argument is one in which both of
the premises are true." The above
argument is considered valid because
S argument:
a set of
premises
supporting a
conclusion
the conclusion follows from the
CHAPTER 6
premises. It is also sound because both premises are, in fact, true statements. If premise 1 or
2 could be shown to be false, the argument would still be valid, but it would be unsound.
Let's consider another example from Alice's exchange with the Cheshire Cat:
Premise 1: If a dog growls when angry and wags its tail when pleased, it is not mad.
Premise 2: I [the Cat] growl when pleased and wag my tail when angry.
Conclusion: Therefore, I am mad.
The conclusion must follow from the premises for this argument to be valid, but that's
not the case here. The Cat's behavior could be due to an eccentric or contrary condition. It
is not necessarily evidence of madness. In formal logic, a conclusion that does not follow
from the premises is called a non sequitur (Latin for it does not follow).2 The argument is
also unsound because the first premise is not always true.
In an inductive argument, the conclusion is inferred from the premises, and could
change with new or more information. While deductive arguments take general principles
and draw specific conclusions, inductive arguments take specific instances and form general
principles.!3 Here is an example:
Most winters in Minnesota have been cold.
Therefore, next winter in Minnesota will probably be cold.
Because an inductive argument is a probability, it cannot prove anything absolutely, but
it can give us a reasonable degree of confidence in a particular statement. The more likely
the conclusion, the greater the argument's strength.
3. Critical Thinking
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to explain
four practices essential to critical
thinking.
We have already seen that not all arguments
are valid or sound. However, as Alice
discovered, flawed arguments are not always
easy to detect. In order to determine an
argument's trustworthiness, we must learn
to think critically. Critical thinking is the
& critical
thinking:
the process
of analyzing
and evaluating
information-
for validity and
soundness
process of analyzing and evaluating information
for validity and soundness. It requires an
investment of time and thought which is
necessary to determining an argument's credibility!*
A critical thinker is not someone who goes around internally criticizing everyone and
everything. A critical thinker is one who pays careful attention to arguments (both obvious
and not-so-obvious and then evaluates those arguments to determine whether they have
merit. In a culture where we are daily bombarded with more information than we can
handle, it can be tempting to drift mindlessly into the constant stream of entertainment
CHAPTER6|


<!-- page-4 -->

d assertion:
a confident
statement
of belief
unsupported by
reasons
available at our fingertips. The critical thinker resists the temptation to zone out and seeks
to keep his or her mind awake and engaged. The following practices are characteristic of
critical thinkers.
Attentive listening. Many arguments fail simply because the arguer has not really listened
to the other person. Careful listening requires focused attention on the other person
(including their vocal inflections, body language,
and word choices) and consideration of context.
Arguers are frequently so focused on what they
want to say next that they miss much of what
the other person says. As a result, they aim their
response at the wrong target. Another common
listening failure happens when quotes and sound
bites are accepted or utilized out of context, which
results in misunderstanding and hasty judgments.
The critical thinker is not satisfied with mere
sound bites but will seek to understand the broader
context of a person's statements.
Distinguishing between arguments and assertions. Critical thinkers learn how to
distinguish between arguments and assertions. As we have already seen, an argument is a
set of premises supporting a conclusion. Another way to state this is that an argument is a
statement or conclusion that is supported with specific reasons. An assertion is merely a
confident statement of belief unsupported by reasons.
Of course, an asserted belief may be built on specific reasons, but can communicate
true or false information.! Therefore, a statement still qualifies as an assertion if the one
making the statement does not support these reasons. "God exists" is a simple assertion
that proves nothing. The statement "God exists, and here are three reasons why I believe
that is so...
" is an argument with much greater persuasive power.
Using words carefully. Critical thinkers take responsibility for the words they use and
hold others responsible for their words. In their communication, they seek to be:
• clear—making their meaning as plain as possible
• accurate-presenting information in an exact manner
• relevant—stating premises and conclusions simply and staying on topic
• consistent-avoiding contradictions in their arguments and actions
• complete-thoroughly researching their argument and investigating opposing views
• fair-being as impartial as possible and open about their own biases
• courageous—presenting their argument with confidence and humility
Critical thinkers also look for these qualities in others' arguments. When terms are
ambiguous, they seek clarification. When research is questionable, they investigate for
themselves. When an argument is clearly biased, they seek to determine what effect this
has its strength.
Weighing sources. Critical thinkers carefully investigate the sources on which arguments
are built. Sources may include books, articles, podcasts, lectures, or personal experiences.
However, not all sources are created equal. The best sources are generally those where the
authors are knowledgeable and have substantial experience in the particular field relevant
to the argument. Good sources also tend to be honest about their biases and their research
limitations. Free online encyclopedias and similar sources that anyone can edit may be
considered for gathering basic info but are usually inappropriate for serious arguments.
4. Fallacies Part 1
› OBJECTIVE: You will be able to critique three fallacies: ad hominem, tu quoque,
and the straw man argument.
By thinking critically, we will be able to both reason better ourselves and be more aware
of faulty reasoning when we encounter it. This is a vital skill in a world where anyone
(regardless of knowledge, experience, or expertise can publish thoughts on anything. Our
social media feeds are crowded with opinions, arguments, and assertions, many of which
are poorly reasoned.
In logic, a faulty argument is called a fallacy—a mistake in reasoning that renders an
argument invalid, unsound, weak, or ineffective.
Sadly, fallacious arguments are often uncritically accepted because they play to our
preconceived notions, desires, prejudices, or self-interest. Some people craft fallacious
arguments with the intent to deceive and manipulate others, a practice known as
sophistry-"the art of deluding an audience with
arguments that one knows to be illogical or
misleading."6 Greed, desire for power or fame,
lust, and ill will are all motives that lead people to
intentionally deceive. In a tragic irony, those who
engage in sophistry have themselves been deceived
by the powers of evil (Proverbs 6:12-15).
o fallacy:
a mistake in reasoning
that renders an argument
invalid, unsound, weak,
or ineffective
Of course, the use of fallacious arguments
is often unintentional. The arguer may have
innocently made a mistake in reasoning. Just
as we give ourselves grace to make mistakes, we
must extend that same grace to others. We cannot
assume that everyone is out to deceive us, or we will become wary and defensive. That
said, if we learn to identify some basic fallacies, we will be less likely to be deceived and
better equipped for reasonable discussion with others. In the following three sections,
we'll look at 15 of the most common fallacies.
Ad hominem. In this fallacy, one attacks the character or motivations of the arguer instead
of the actual argument. Ad hominem (Latin for to the person) essentially "consists in arguing
that so-and-so must have bad ideas because so-and-so is a bad man or woman." Consider
these examples: "Atheists only deny God's existence because they are God-haters." Or
"Christians can't be trusted to be objective because they don't think for themselves." Both
CHAPTER 6 | 93
92 | CHAPTER 6
S Logic and Love


<!-- page-5 -->

94 | CHAPTER 6
of these examples wrongly imply that we do not have to take atheists or Christians seriously
because of some defect in their character. However, in both cases, the defect (real or
perceived) is irrelevant to whether or not their arguments are actually true.
Tu quoque (too KWO-kee). Tu quoque (Latin for you, too) includes attempting to defend
your error by pointing out a similar error in your opponent. In this fallacy, the arguer
shifts the focus to feature the other person's flaw in attempt to excuse their own.! It also
includes a "look who's talking" attitude,
suggesting that your opponent doesn't
practice what he or she preaches. Here are
two examples: "Who are you to tell me
that lying is wrong? You do it all the time."
The straw
man fallacy is
a distortion of
an opponent s
argument,.
making it easier
to attack.
Or "Christianity isn't true because all the
Christians I know are hypocrites." In the
first example, a liar who argues that lying is
wrong is certainly inconsistent, but this does
not justify you in telling a lie. In the second
example, the hypocrisy of some Christians
does not in itself invalidate Christianity.
You need to investigate the actual claims of
Christianity to determine its truth.
Straw man. In a straw man fallacy, the arguer distorts an opponent's argument, making
it easier to attack. Generally, the argument is made to look so ridiculous that only a fool
would believe it. Consider these straw man arguments: "People who don't believe the
book of Jonah is literal history think they can pick and choose what they want to believe
in Scripture." Or, "Since you do not support LGBTQ+ organizations, you obviously hate
LGBTQ+ people." Both of these arguments fail to do justice to the actual views of those
who hold them. Author and pastor Tim Keller wisely advises: "When each side has learned
to represent the other's argument in its strongest and most positive form .... Only then is
it safe and fair to disagree with it."9
5. Fallacies Part 2
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to identify the fallacies in six types of arguments.
Scare tactic. In this fallacy, a person is threatened with negative consequences if he or she
does not accept the arguer's conclusion. These kinds of arguments prey on people's fears.
For example, "If abortion is not freely available, many women will die in secret back-alley
abortions." Or, "If you don't go to church, you can't be a Christian." In both examples, the
fear of negative consequences is invoked as the primary reason for accepting the argument
without considering other relevant factors. If a threatened outcome is possible or even
probable, it is relevant, but it should not be used to manipulate people into accepting
an argument.
Slippery slope. The slippery slope fallacy "is the idea that one small step in a certain
direction will inevitably lead to a process with a big undesirable outcome."2 Another way
of saying this is, "one thing leads to another" Consider this example: "If vou take on
sip of alcohol, soon you'll be hung over every morning; then, you'll drive drunk and kill
people." Whatever your convictions are regarding alcohol use, this argument is a fallacy
because some people have a sip of alcohol and never slide all the way to drunk driving and
vehicular manslaughter. The key to avoiding the slippery slope error is showing a sufficient
causal connection between the beginning of the argument and its conclusion.
False dilemma. In a false dilemma, or false cause, the arguer attempts to force a choice
between only two possibilities when there are other options. For example, "If you don't
agree with me, you're not my friend." Or, "You either accept Christianity and abandon
science, or you trust science and abandon Christianity?" False dilemmas depend on
unwarranted assumptions. The first example allows you no option to be for someone while
disagreeing with one of his or her ideas. In the second example, the argument is framed
with the false assumption that Christianity and science are incompatible, and therefore, it
is imperative to choose between them. In other words, a correlation between two events
does not prove a cause.?1
Red herring.
Though the exact origin of the term red herring is uncertain, the story goes
that a young boy once used a red herring (a smelly kind of fish) to divert hounds from
chasing a rabbit. In this fallacy, the arguer introduces an irrelevant issue that distracts
from the main argument.? For example, in a debate about religious violence, a speaker
declares, "Yes, religious people have done many evil
things, but look at all the good things they have done!"
In this example, the speaker employs a red herring (the
good deeds) to divert the listener's attention from the
argument at hand, which is about religious people doing
evil. There may be a time when the arguer can bring up
the good deeds; however, the arguer must first address
the problem of religious people doing evil.
Circular argument. In Chapter 2, we saw an example
of a circular argument in which a person claimed that
the Bible is true simply because it says it is. In this
fallacy, also known as begging the question, the arguer
assumes what he or she is trying to prove? Here is
another example: "The United States is the best place
to live, because it's better than any other country." The
argument that the United States is the best place to live consists only of the assertion that
it is better than any other country-precisely what the arguer is trying to prove! Other
reasons are needed to make this an actual argument.
Weak analogy. A weak analogy occurs when an arguer compares two things that aren't
comparable in any relevant respect. For example, "If you believe in atoms, you should
also believe in God. We can't see either with the naked eye, but we know atoms are real.
So, God must be real too." Or, "Believing that Jesus rose from the dead is like believing
in zombies." The first example is a weak analogy because an atom is a particle that
CHAPTER 6 | 95


<!-- page-6 -->

can be studied using scientific processes. In contrast, God is a supernatural being who
cannot be examined using a microscope. The second example is a weak analogy because
the resurrected Jesus is a fully living, embodied being, whereas a zombie is merely a
reanimated corpse.
6. Fallacies Part 3
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to distinguish the fallacies in six other types of
arguments.
Appeal to pity. In this fallacy, the arguer attempts to persuade us to accept a conclusion
by appealing to feelings of pity or sympathy irrelevant to the argument. For example,
"God should let all sincere people into heaven, whether or not they have trusted Jesus."
In this example, the arguer appeals to our sense of pity for those who have been sincere.
However, a person's sincerity is irrelevant to
the question of whether or not Jesus is the
only way to heaven.
Appeal to irrelevant authority. Appealing
to appropriate authorities is generally a wise
course of action. For example, you should
EXPERT
WITNESS
consult your doctor if you are feeling sick.
But a fallacy occurs when we "resort to
the opinions of an authority figure on a
topic outside his or her area of expertise."25
Examples of this would include consulting
a pastor (untrained in physics) on quantum
gravity, or a physicist (untrained in biblical
interpretation) on the meaning of Leviticus. If someone is not an authority on a particular
subject, this does not mean he can't know anything about it or that his opinions about it
are wrong, but in a serious argument, it is fallacious to appeal to irrelevant authorities.
Argument from silence. In this argument, the arguer claims a conclusion is true because
an opponent has not provided any evidence against it. An argument from silence also
occurs when "the silence of the authority regarding some particular claim is taken as
evidence against the claim itself."2 For example, "The Apostle Paul never mentions the
virgin birth in his letters, so he probably didn't believe in it." Or, "Egyptian records don't
mention the Exodus event; therefore, it must be made up." The first example is fallacious
because it takes Paul's silence on the virgin birth as evidence of his disagreement with the
doctrine. However, his silence might just as well mean that he believes in it but feels no
need to bring it up. The second argument is fallacious because the Egyptians may have
had good reasons for not including the Exodus event in their official records.?
Bandwagon. In the bandwagon fallacy, an appeal is made to accept the conclusions
of an argument because they are popular. The warning, "You don't want to be behind
the times, do you?" generally indicates of this fallacy. Such arguments depend on the
| CHAPTER 6
assumption that whatever is popular or widely accepted is right. Here is an example:
"The idea of miracles actually happening is nonsense. Modern people have outgrown
such silly notions.?" The arguer presumes that since it is no longer popular to believe in
miracles, miracles are not possible. Yet proving the impossibility of miracles would require
substantial evidence, not merely the fact that believing in miracles is no longer popular.
Loaded words. In this fallacy, an inflammatory word (such as insane, racist, homophobe,
misogynist, or fascist) is hurled at your opponent's position to make it look bad. Here is
an example from evolutionary biologist Richard
Dawkins: "The God of the Old Testament is...
jealous and proud of it; a petty, unjust, unforgiving
control-freak; a vindictive, bloodthirsty ethnic
cleanser; a misogynistic, homophobic, racist,
infanticidal, genocidal, filicidal, pestilential,
megalomaniacal, sadomasochistic, capriciously
malevolent bully."28 While these loaded words may
sway people to believe that God is evil, they do not
constitute an actual argument?
Hasty generalization. This fallacy consists of
making a large, generalized claim about an entire
group based on insufficient evidence (i.e., because part of a group has this quality, the
whole group has to have this quality 3® Consider these examples: "Christianity is dying in
the West. Soon the world will be totally secular." Or, "Islamic terrorist groups prove that
Islam is a violent religion." The first example fails to consider the fact that Christianity
is growing rapidly in non-Western nations. The second example assumes that Islam is a
violent religion because of the existence of Islamic terrorist groups, but it does not examine
the claims of Islam to see if its teachings justify or promote violence. In both examples, the
stated evidence is insufficient to support the claim.
These are just 15 of the most common logical fallacies, but many more could be
discussed. The more you practice critical thinking skills, the more adept you will become
at making better arguments and spotting faulty ones.
7. Listening Goes a Long Way
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to demonstrate five ways to improve your
listening skills.
Grasping the basic principles of logic, critical thinking, and argumentation can aid your
apologetic encounters. Learning these principles takes time and effort. As Christian
philosopher J. P. Moreland wrote, "Knowledge is the fruit of study, and knowledge is
necessary for wisdom."3! Yet, knowledge will not automatically make us wise or loving
people, and knowledge used without wisdom and love can be harmful. Our ability to
reason is God's gift, to be used in a Christlike manner. In the following three sections, let's
consider some practices that can help us do just that.
9 Logic and Love
CHAPTER 6 | 97


<!-- page-7 (book p.98) -->

CHAPTER 6
We already touched on listening, but it cannot be emphasized too much. Scripture
itself calls our attention to the necessity of listening. According to Proverbs 18:2, "A
fool takes no pleasure in understanding, but
only in expressing his [or her] opinion." A
later proverb points out the folly of giving
an answer before hearing (Proverbs 18:13).
For example James 1:19 admonishes us to be
"quick to hear" and "slow to speak." Jesus
always made time to listen to others, even
when it was inconvenient (Mark 5:21-34).
And even though he already knew what
was in the human heart (John 2:25), he was
interested in what other people had to say
(Luke 24:13-24).
Wise and loving listeners will offer other people their full attention. They will listen
intently to the words being spoken while also listening for unstated assumptions,
questions, and motivations. They will pay attention to body language, considering facial
expressions, gestures, and posture, how quickly or slowly other people speak, shifting
intonations in voice, and so on.
Here are some simple ways you can communicate your attention and offer the gift of
listening to others.
• Put your phone away. If you've ever been in a conversation with someone who is
constantly glancing at their phone, you know how distracting this can be. Even a
brief glance suggests to the other person that your attention is elsewhere or that you
are more interested in your phone than in the conversation. That's why the best place
for your phone during a conversation is your pocket or purse.
• Be judicious with eye contact. How much eye contact you make with another
person depends on the culture you are in. In the United States, eye contact tends to
communicate interest and attention, whereas in other cultures, it may communicate
romantic interest or even a challenge to authority. When speaking with another
person, consider how that person might interpret eye contact. When eye contact is
appropriate, do your best to position yourself so that your eyes are not constantly
drawn away from the other person.
• Offer physical and verbal gestures of interest. Even if you are fully engaged, total
stillness and silence on your part can communicate a lack of interest. Try to offer the
speaker some kind of nod or other physical gesture to encourage him or her to keep
talking. Verbal expressions like "yes," "I see," "okay," and others are also appropriate
if not overused.
• Try to forget about yourself. When listening to another person, it is highly
tempting to plan out the next thing you will say. Try as much as you can to resist this
and simply be with the other person. To help you stay focused, you may wish to offer
silent prayers to God, like, "God, help me to be fully present with this person."
• Wait to speak. When the person you are listening to pauses or concludes, try to hold
silence for at least five seconds before speaking. People often have more they want to
say, but because we jump in at the first chance, we miss the opportunity to hear it.
Give the person the opportunity to say what he or she needs to say.
8. Asking Questions
» OBJECTIVE: You will be able to employ five types of questions to enhance
conversation with people who have different beliefs than your own.
Wise and loving apologists make a point of asking questions in their conversations with
others. When it is your turn to speak, it may be tempting to immediately launch into a
counterargument, answer a question, or state your opinion. Still, a question will often
make the greatest difference.
It is estimated that Jesus asked 307 questions while answering only three? This
is remarkable given that "all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge" are hidden in Christ (Colossians 2:3). If Jesus, who
knew so much, offered so few answers and instead chose to ask
questions, how much more should we (who know so little engage
others with questions? Consider this small sampling of questions
Jesus asked:
• "Why are you so afraid?" (Matthew 8:26)
• "Who do you say that I am?" (Matthew 16:15)
• "What do you want me to do for you?" (Mark 10:51)
• "What is written in the Law? How do you read it?"
(Luke 10:26)
• "Does this offend you?" (John 6:61)
• "Who is it you are looking for?" (John 18:23).
Questions show people that you are genuinely interested in
them and care about what they have to say. They also allow you to
encounter beliefs different from yours and learn where others are coming from. Questions
can be beneficial when you have identified a flaw in someone else's argument. When this
happens, it is not wise to triumphantly point it out-"Your argument is illogical!" or
"That doesn't make any sense." A person who has been spoken to in this way may become
defensive or feel foolish, in which case that person may not be interested in talking further
with you. A good question, on the other hand, when asked graciously, invites further
conversation and exploration.
Below are several questions you could ask in conversation. To make this more concrete,
imagine you are having a conversation with an atheist named Jason:
• What do you mean by -
_____? Many conversations are wrecked when
words are not clearly defined. Socrates, one of the greatest arguers of all time, always
required his opponents to define their terms. So, if Jason says, "I don't believe God
exists," you ought to ask him, "What or who do you mean by God?" You may find
that the god he describes is not the god you believe in either.
• What leads you to believe that is true? How did you come to that conclusion?
This question needs to be asked gently, but firmly. If Jason makes an assertion, it is
Jesús de
Nazaret, 2007
painting by
Fernando de
Gorocica
CHAPTER 6 99


<!-- page-8 -->

his job to make a case for the truth of his assertion. It is not your job to prove him
wrong. Instead, ask: "What evidence leads you to believe that God does not exist?"
You might also ask him what sources inform his beliefs.
• What difference does that make in your life? This question brings the conversation
out of the abstract and into real life. You might say to Jason, "You don't believe God
exists. How does that impact the way you live?"
"Do you think it would be better if everyone
believed what you do?" Or, "Are there any
significant consequences if you are wrong about
God's existence?"
• Can you say more about that? Can you help me
understand? These questions help draw the other
person out, inviting further conversation. They
are also a way of asking for clarification if you
are unsure what Jason means by some particular
phrase or point.
• Have you ever considered
? Christians are proposers, not imposers. 33
Statements like "You're wrong" or "That's stupid" make people defensive and less
receptive. Instead of imposing your own beliefs, you can propose alternative ways of
thinking. In Jason's case, you might ask, "Have you ever considered the possibility
that if God exists, he might be good?"
9. Employing Scripture with Love
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to differentiate between appropriate and
inappropriate ways to use Scripture in apologetic encounters.
While Scripture is not employed in every apologetic encounter, it is, at some point,
necessary for the explanation of the gospel.34 But how we engage with the Bible in our
apologetic conversations is of utmost importance and requires that we continually utilize
God's gift of reason. Paul urged Timothy to rightly handle God's truth (2 Timothy 2:15).
We, too, must learn how to handle God's truth in an appropriate fashion.
Hebrews 4:12 says, "For the word of God is living and active, sharper than any two-
edged sword, piercing to the division of soul and of spirit, of joints and of marrow, and
discerning the thoughts and intentions of the heart." There is an important distinction
to be made here. The Bible is a live book in which the Holy Spirit continues to speak
(Ephesians 6:17). It is, in itself, the instrument that cuts to the heart—convicting,
challenging, and inviting people into a new way of life. It is not a weapon which
Christians wield to attack non-Christians (or other Christians).
When Christians use the Bible like a bludgeon against others, they can do great
harm. This happens whenever the Bible is used in an attempt to shut someone down.
Consider this common social-media scenario: a Christian comments on a post he
disagrees with by quoting a verse of the Bible (often out of context). The Christian
assumes that quoting the Bible gives him the moral high ground and falsely claims
that the argument is now settled. While it is true that God's Word has authority and
commands our obedience, whipping the Bible about in this hostile and critical fashion is
entirely inappropriate and unconvincing, especially to those who do not already hold to
the authority of the Bible.
Beware of referencing biblical verses that are irrelevant to the point being made.
Christian integrity requires that honesty about what verses do and do not say. This
requires careful study and consideration of the context. Another thing that helps us avoid
this error is knowing that we do not have to back up everything we say with a specific
Bible verse. The Bible is not a rule book. It does not speak on every possible topic precisely
because God wants us to use our minds to discern wise, godly ways of living.
If our goal in apologetics is to win arguments, we may at times be tempted to use
Scripture inappropriately. But if our goal is to lead others to Jesus, we will be less
concerned with winning arguments and more concerned with showing Jesus' love to
others. We will be honest about what we do and do not know, including what's in the
Bible. We will admit that we are not infallible
interpreters of Scripture. We will be honest
that even though we submit to God's
authority in Scripture, we don't always fully
understand it. We won't be afraid to say, "I'm
not sure about that, let me do some research
and get back with you," Or, "Honestly, I'm
not well-enough informed about that topic
to speak on it. Let me connect you with
someone else who could help," or simply
Such an attitude demonstrates wisdom,
discernment, and love for God and others.
And love, after all, matters most. Paul put it
bluntly in 1 Corinthians 13:1-2: "We may possess great knowledge and eloquence, but if
we do not have love, we are no more than clanging cymbals." The one who loves will not
be a weaponized encyclopedia of biblical quotations, but someone who humbly allows the
Bible to be the instrument that convicts and draws others to Jesus.
10. Conclusion
Before concluding this chapter, let's return to Alice's Adventures in Wonderland. Spoiler
alert: Alice's mind-boggling journey culminates in a mad trial (complete with living
playing cards), the logic of which no one in the story can figure out. Amid chaos and
confusion, Alice stubbornly refuses to give way to the Queen of Heart's senseless ideas.
When the King tells the jury to consider their verdict, the Queen replies:
"No, no!" said the Queen. "Sentence first—verdict afterwards."
"Stuff and nonsense!" said Alice loudly. "The idea of having the sentence first!"
CHAPTER 6 | 101
100 | CHAPTER 6


<!-- page-9 -->

Alice and the
Queen of Hearts,
1907 illustration
by Charles
Robinson
102 | CHAPTER 6
"Hold your tongue!" said the Queen, turning purple.
"I won't!" said Alice.
"Off with her head!" the Queen shouted at the top of her voice. Nobody moved.
"Who cares for you?" said Alice... "You're nothing but a
pack of cards!"35
And with that, the entire pack of cards descends angrily
upon Alice, only for Alice to awaken in the real world. It
had all been a dream.
Alice's final adventure raises an important issue as we
consider the use of reason and logic in apologetics. It is the
issue of effectiveness. In this chapter, we have examined
important principles of logic and critical thinking,
identified 15 different fallacies, and discussed three ways of
demonstrating wisdom and love in apologetic conversations
(listening, asking good questions, and using Scripture
with care). But what if our efforts aren't effective? What if
a perfectly logical argument fails to convince? What if the
people we are conversing with are not concerned about being
reasonable or logically consistent, and worse, they respond
negatively when we are? Further, what if the very thing we
are trying to argue or defend does not seem to have a logical
explanation?
These questions are not merely theoretical. As we said earlier, many people are
convinced by faulty arguments and reasoning that have no basis in reality. Propaganda,
manipulation, and other fallacious forms of argumentation are too often effective in
winning arguments and convincing people to join causes. So, what do we do when reason
and logic fail?
Like Alice, we may double down, growing angry and impatient, stomping our feet, and
refusing to budge. However, the fact that reason does not always convince people should
alert us to an essential truth about human beings. We are not mere brains or logic-making
computers. We are embodied, emotional persons; sometimes, our hearts reject what our
minds tell us to accept. Because of this, even the most airtight arguments cannot force
acceptance or prevent the possibility of doubt. If, in our quest to
have a well-ordered mind, we ignore other crucial aspects of what
it means to be human, we will become cold, isolated, and prideful.
The irony is that relying entirely upon reason alone will actually
make you less reasonable. As Christian apologist G. K. Chesterton
put it, "Thinking in isolation and with pride ends in being an idiot.
[Everyone] who will not have softening of the heart must at last have
softening of the brain."36
So, while holding fast to the principles of logic, we acknowledge
that mere logic is not enough. To engage the whole person, we want
to consider their embodied experience, their emotions, their doubts,
and much more. In Chapter 7, we turn to these topics.
British author G. K.
Chesterton, 1874-1936
ENDNOTES - 6
+ Lewis Carroll, Alice's Adventures in Wonderland (London: Chancellor Press, 1985), 75-77.
2 Alister E. McGrath, Narrative Apologetic (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Books, 2019), 21.
3 "Reason Is Absolute." n.d., Importance of Philosophy, importanceofphilosophy.com/Epistemology_
Reason.html.
4 C. S. Lewis, ed. Walter Hooper, Selected Literary Essays (New York, NY: Cambridge University Press, 2013),
265.
s Travis Dickinson, Logic and the Way of Jesus: Thinking Critically and Christianly (Nashville, TN: B&H
Academic, 2022), 103.
Dickinson, Logic and the Way of Jesus, 106-107.
7 Dickinson, Logic and the Way of Jesus, 108-109.
8 Zach Lee, Logic for Christians: Critical Thinking for the People of God (Houston, TX: Lucid Books, 2021), 19.
› Dickinson, Logic and the Way of Jesus, 111.
10 Lee, Logic for Christians, 60.
" Lee, Logic for Christians, 69.
12 Dickinson, Logic and the Way of Jesus, 251.
13 Lee, Logic for Christians, 59.
14 Dickinson, Logic and the Way of Jesus, 102.
15 Forrest E. Baird, How Do We Reason? An Introduction to Logic (Downers Grove, IL: Inter Varsity Press,
2021), 25.
16 Michael Shenefelt and Heidi White, If A then B: How the World Discovered Logic (New York: Columbia
University Press, 2013), 192.
17 Shenefelt and White, If A then B, 251.
18 Lee, Logic for Christians, 146.
19 Tim Keller, The Reason for God: Belief in an Age of Skepticism (New York: Riverhead Books, 2008), xix.
20 Lee Hardy et al., The Little Logic Book (Grand Rapids, MI: Calvin College Press, 2013), 140.
21 Baird, How Do We Reason? 67.
22 Dickinson, Logic and the Way of Jesus, 262.
23 Lee, Logic for Christians, 127.
24 Baird, How Do We Reason? 66.
25 Hardy et al., Logic Book, 145.
26 Steven Lewis, "The Argument from Silence," SES, July 27, 2017, ses.edu/the-argument-from-silencel.
27 Lewis, "The Argument from Silence."
28 Richard Dawkins, The God Delusion (New York: Mariner Books, 2008), 51.
2 Christian rebuttals of Dawkins' characterization of God include Amy K. Hall, "What Dawkins Really
Thinks," Stand to Reason (01/30/2014), str.org/w/what-dawkins-really-thinks; "Is Richard Dawkins'
caricature of the God of the Old Testament accurate?" GotQuestions.org, n.d., gorquestions.org/God-of-the-
Old-Testament.html.
30 Dickinson, Logic and the Way of Jesus, 283.
31 J. P. Moreland, Love Your God with All Your Mind: The Role of Reason in the Life of the Soul (Colorado
Springs, CO: NavPress, 1997), 53.
32 Martin B. Copenhaver, Jesus Is the Question: The 307 Questions Jesus Asked and the 3 He Answered
(Nashville, TN: Abingdon Press, 2014).
33 Richard John Neuhaus, "Telling the World Its Own Story," Wilberforce Forum (July 2001).
34 There are a number of reasons why Scripture is not always used in apologetic conversations. Here are two:
First, God has revealed much through creation and in our hearts. If a person is particularly uninterested
or hostile to Scripture, an apologist may attempt to demonstrate God's truch through general revelation.
Scripture is necessary for explaining the gospel, but people are not always ready to hear it. Second, Scripture
does not speak on every topic that someone might like to know abour. In such cases, the apologist may look
to God for help in presenting knowledge and opinions about the topic.
35 Carroll, Alice's Adventures in Wonderland, 158.
36G. K. Chesterton, Orthodoxy (Peabody, MA: Hendrickson Publishers, 2006), 37.
9 Logic and Love
CHAPTER 6 | 103
