# Chapter 8

<!-- page-1 -->

Truth and
Tolerance
1. What Is Truth?
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to describe Christian and non-Christian claims
about truth.
It is between AD 30 and 33, and Pontius Pilate has a decision to make. The Jewish leaders
were calling for the execution of a man named Jesus, and the power of life and death
is in Pilate's hands. "We found this man (Jesus) misleading our nation and forbidding
us to give tribute to Caesar, and saying that he himself is Christ, a king" (Luke 23:2).
Subversion, opposition to taxes, claiming to be a king—all of these charges should raise
Pilate's interest. Yet, Pilate suspects the charges are false and that the Jewish leaders have
accused Jesus out of envy (Matthew 27:18).
He takes Jesus aside and questions him: "Are you the King of the Jews?'... What
have you done?' Jesus answered, You say that I am a king. For this purpose, I was born
and for this purpose I have come into the world to bear
witness to the truth. Everyone who is of the truth listens to my
voice? Pilate said to him, 'What is truth?" John 18:33-38a).
Pilate seems to have no time to wait for an answer. He walks
out and tries to get Jesus released but eventually gives in to
pressure and has Jesus crucified.
Pilate's question, "What is truth?" rings out through the
centuries. Philosophers, poets, and ordinary people have asked it
at every time and place. Humans have an inner longing for the
truth about God, ourselves, and our world. We are all searching
for something to help us make sense of our existence and live
meaningful and fulfilling lives. We yearn to experience the
freedom that Jesus promises the truth will give (John 8:32).
Christians believe that truth can be known. Because we are
created in God's image, we are intended to discover truth in relationship with God. The
truth we seek is found in Jesus. "I," says Jesus, "am the way, and the truth, and the life"
(John 14:6). "All the treasures of wisdom and knowledge" are hidden in Jesus (Colossians
2:3). To know the truth, we begin with Jesus and abide in his Word. Only then can the
truth set us free.
Furthermore, Christians believe the truth about Jesus applies to all people at all times
and places. But not everyone agrees with the Christian biblical worldview. Adherents
of many of the world's religions claim that their religion is the one that leads to truth.
Others argue that the only way to find truth is to abandon religious belief and rely solely
on reason or science. Still other worldviews claim that no truth applies to everyone. They
say there are only individual or cultural truths: "That may be true for you, but it's not true
for me." Some worldviews go even further, arguing that claiming to know the truth is
arrogant, bigoted, and intolerant.
How can we discover truth in a world with competing claims and growing skepticism
about the possibility of truth? Where should we look for it? Whom should we trust? Is it
even possible to know what is true? And if it is possible to know the truth, is it intolerant
to share that truth with others? In this chapter,
we'll pursue answers to these questions as we
explore various ideas about truth.
2. The Nature of Truth
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to differentiate
between objective and subjective truth
claims.
What does it mean to say that something is true?
Let's begin by considering beliefs. A belief is simply
an idea someone holds about the nature of reality.
9 Truth and Tolerance
Jesus and Pilate,
1505 fresco,
Neuberg Abbey,
Neuberg an der
Murz, Austria
CHAPTER 8 | 121


<!-- page-2 -->

Beliefs are important, but in and of themselves, they are not sufficient for determining
truth. For example, you may sincerely believe that a particular chair can hold you up
if you sit in it. But this belief is not sufficient to
demonstrate the truth of your claim. Your belief
must be grounded in knowledge, which may be
defined as justified true belief.!
& knowledge:
justified true belief
For a belief to count as knowledge, it must first
be justified-supported by reasons. We may justify
our beliefs through reason, observation, experience,
introspection, or authority. So, you may be justified
in believing that the chair is capable of holding
you up because you know that this is its purpose
(reason), you have seen others sitting in this chair
safely (observation), you sat in this chair on other
occasions and remembered doing so (experience and introspection), or you trust someone
who told you the chair could hold you up (authority). However, just because a belief is
justified does not guarantee it is true. Here's an example: For years, astronomers believed
that the planet Mercury's "wobble" was explained by the gravitational pull of the planet
Vulcan. Never heard of Vulcan? That's because it doesn't exist. Yet, until Albert Einstein
proved that Vulcan was imaginary, there were many good reasons to think it was real.
Even though scientists and astronomers had justifiable scientific reasons for believing in
Vulcan, their belief turned out to be false.?
For our beliefs to be true, they must also correspond to how the world actually is. This
is known as the correspondence theory of truth. It is the view that the truth of a proposition
is determined by how accurately it describes the facts of reality. So, you may be justified
in believing that a chair can hold you up. If you then sit in the chair and it holds you up,
your belief corresponds with reality, and your belief is true. Author and speaker Alisa
Childers sums it up,
Truth is true for all people in all places and times. It's also something you can't invent,
think up, or create, It is something you discover. It doesn't change, no matter how much
people's beliefs about it do. Truth isn't altered
because of how it makes someone feel.
& objective truth claim:
a claim regarding an
independent fact about
the world
2+2=
Knowing truth can be difficult and
sometime someone may make a claim that they
believe to be true, but it is not grounded in
reality. So, there are two type of truth claims.
First, is objective truth, and it does not change
based on what we think about it, whether or
not we experience it, how we feel about it, or
what others say about it. Truth exists entirely
independent of us. So then, an objective truth claim is a claim regarding an independent
fact about the world.
Some examples of objective truths claims are "2 + 2 = 4, "Humans need oxygen to
breathe," "World War II ended in 1952, or "The Red Sox won the World Series in 2018?
You may have noticed that one of these statements is false. An objective truth claim is a
fact that can proved to be either true or false based on reality. If it is true, it is true for
everyone; if it is false, it is false for everyone. So, 2 + 2 = 4 is objectively true. The claim
that World War II ended in 1952 is objectively false.
In addition to objective truth claims, there are subjective truth claims. A subjective
truth claim is a claim regarding a dependent fact about the subject.
Subjective truth claims are about matters of preference taste, and cannot be proven true
or false because they are not based on facts. Statements such as, "I like chocolate better
than any other ice cream flavor," "Reading is boring for me," or "I think Michael Jordan is
the greatest basketball player of all time" are
all subjective truth claims. These statements
may be true for the people who make them,
but not necessarily for anyone else. You may
feel strongly that reading is boring, but your
• subjective truth claim:
a claim regarding a dependent
fact about the subject
statement doesn't tell us anything objectively
true about reading; it only tells us you are
bored by it. Subjective claims are not true for
all people at all times and places.
To continue our progress in discovering
truth, we will need to learn how to
distinguish between objective and subjective
truth claims.
3. The Necessity of Trust
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to discuss plausibility structures and the
relationship of trust and risk to knowledge.
We have said that a belief counts as knowledge if it is justified and true, and a belief is
true if it corresponds with objective reality. Let's now return to the belief that a particular
chair can hold you up if you sit in it. First, notice that this is an objective truch claim. If
you sit in the chair, it will either hold you or it won't. Your feeling or desire that the chair
will hold you does not change that fact. But how can you know for sure? You could stand
around for hours thinking about why the chair should hold you, but in the end, there is
only one way to find out. You take the risk of sitting in the chair.
This simple example illustrates a crucial point about knowledge. All true knowing
involves risk.* Because we are not God, our knowledge will always be limited. You can
never be sure that the chair will hold you until you sit in it. So, unless you want to stand
around forever, you must trust that the chair can hold you and take the risk of sitting in it.
122 | CHAPTER 8
CHAPTER 8 | 123


<!-- page-3 -->

Similarly, to know anything at all, we first commit to some belief that cannot be
proven with absolute certainty. The beliefs we trust in this way make up a plausibility
structure—a view of the world that determines what is reasonable or possible.
A plausibility structure is somewhat similar to a worldview. It forms the foundation on
which our knowledge is built and colors how we interpret information. But how do we
know for sure that we have the right plausibility structure? If we can't know with absolute
certainty, does that mean it is impossible to know anything? Must we simply take a blind
leap into the dark? Not at all. As with our other beliefs, we can and should attempt to
justify our plausibility structure using all available evidence.
Let's look at an example. In Lydia's plausibility
structure, the material world is all that exists.
& plausibility structure:
a view of the world that
determines reasonable or
possible
She has never had a supernatural experience and
finds that natural causes can explain most odd
occurrences, so she feels justified in her plausibility
structure. But suppose a trusted friend, Brian,
experiences a miraculous healing that isn't explained
by any natural cause. At first, Lydia might be
skeptical because supernatural healings do not fit
within her plausibility structure. If she is genuinely
curious about the supernatural, she could ask Brian
for evidence: "Has anything like this happened
before? How do you know it was supernatural? What evidence do you have?" If Lydia
receives satisfactory answers to these questions and later discovers further evidence
corroborating the existence of the supernatural, based on this reality, she may conclude
that her plausibility structure is insufficient.
So, we need not take plausibility structures on blind faith. They can be questioned
and examined because they are based on reality. The Bible has much to say about reality.
And the biblical Christian worldview as a system of beliefs is grounded in objective truth,
not just traditions, affirmation, or stories. As one author well describes it, "Christianity
is about placing active trust in the person of Jesus and the reconciliation with God he
secured for us on the Cross. All of this depends upon the resurrection of Jesus being
something that actually happened, an objective truth."
4. A Christian View of Truth
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to summarize a Christian view of truth, including
an explanation of general and special revelation.
A Christian view of truth begins with God. Christians believe that God is a God of
reason and that he made the world in an orderly and intelligible way. He made us with
the capacity to discover truth in his world. A full range of tools are at our disposal for this
task. We can discover truth using our five senses-sight, hearing, smell, taste, touch—and
our reason, emotions, the scientific method, and more. When testing the truth of a specific
claim, we can apply several different tests:
1. The test of reason: Is it reasonable? Can it be logically stated and defended?
2. The test of the outer world: Is there external, corroborating evidence to support it?
3. The test of the inner world: Does it adequately address our experience-the joys,
disappointments, and struggles of our lives?
4. The test of the real world: What happens when this claim is applied in any given
cultural context? What are the consequences??
We can also test claims for clarity, coherence, and consistency. We can check on the
trustworthiness of the sources or authorities making the claims. These tools and rests are
available to all people, not just Christians, and using them allows us to discover the truth
about the world. In addition, they also reveal the
truth about God. This is known as general revelation,
God's universal revelation about himself and morality
from nature and our conscience. Let's consider two ways
in which general revelation reveals truth.
Romans 1:19-20 says that God's eternal
power and divine nature are revealed in creation.
Examination of the natural world—its beauty,
order, and complexity-has led many people to
believe in an Intelligent Designer. Also, Christians
believe that the nature of right and wrong is written
on the conscience of every human being (Romans
2:14-15). This means that absolute moral laws exist,
transcending individual and cultural preferences.
One investigation cataloged numerous moral absolutes that seem consistent across almost
all cultures. Here are just a few:
• Prohibition of murder or maiming without justification
• Prohibition of lying, at least in certain areas
• Sexual restrictions within all societies
• Provision for the poor and unfortunate
• Respect for the dead®
Of course, our knowledge about God from general revelation and what he desires for us
is limited. This is why humans need special revelation, God's unique revelation about himself
through Jesus Christ, the Holy Spirit, the Scriptures, and miraculous events. In Scripture, we
find the record of how God has revealed himself to human beings. We discover that we are
loved by God and created in his image. Scripture also provides the account of Jesus, who
is himself the truth (John 14:6). He shows us who God is (John 1:18), what it means to be
fully human (John 10:10), and the only way to experience salvation (Acts 4:12). The truth
about Jesus is further confirmed and revealed by the Holy Spirit, who guides us in the way
of truth (John 16:13). The Bible also contains accounts of miraculous events which God
used to reveal truth (Hebrews 2:1-4).
CHAPTER 8 | 125
124 | CHAPTER 8


<!-- page-4 -->

British physicist
Sir Isaac Newton
126 | CHAPTER 8
For Christians, the pursuit of truth is not limited to what we can discover on our own.
It also includes what God has revealed. Because the Christian worldview acknowledges the
existence of a material and supernatural realm, it employs the largest possible frame within
which to investigate truth, and it encourages us to use all of our faculties to discover it.
Yet the pursuit of truth is not conducted by totally objective, autonomous human
beings. Everyone begins the quest for truth with trust. Because we are finite and fallen, we
will never know truth exhaustively. Nonetheless, Christians affirm that we can know the
truth with a reasonable degree of confidence. The quest for truth
requires humility and dependence on God.
5. Modernism: Truth Is Found
through Reason and Science
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to explain the rise of
modernism and its view of truth.
The idea that truth can be known through divine revelation was
predominant in the Western world throughout the Middle Ages.
During this time, the Roman Catholic church held great authority
as the interpreter of divine revelation. But this would soon change.
The Protestant Reformation raised serious questions about the
theological authority of the Catholic Church, and nation-states
began asserting their independence against its political authority.
Eventually, these conflicts boiled over into war. Throughout
the sixteenth to eighteenth centuries, Catholics fought Protestants, Protestants fought
Catholics, and Protestants fought other Protestants. All told, it is estimated that "the
wars of religion claimed between [a] third and a quarter of those then living in Western
Europe." In the wake of this violence, many thought it was time for people to rely on
human reason and logic rather than unquestionably trusting religious and political
authorities. Thus began the so-called Age of Enlightenment.
The seeds of the Enlightenment were planted when, in 1637, a French philosopher
and mathematician, René Descartes, argued that human reason was the surest source for
discovering absolute truth. Descartes was looking for a foundation of certainty on which
he could base all his other beliefs, namely that God's existence can be proved, and he
claimed to have found it in his rational mind. He famously declared, "I think, therefore I
am." For Descartes, the foundation for truth was the human power of reason to see truth
as objective, knowable and rational, not divine revelation.!°
Though Descartes was a theist, later Enlightenment thinkers like Voltaire and Jean-
Jacques Rousseau took his ideas and rejected Christianity because they argued God's
existence could not be proved by reason. Though many Enlightenment thinkers still
retained a deistic belief in God, Christianity was seen by some philosophers as mostly
stripped of its supernatural content. To these Enlightenment philosophers, only what
could be demonstrated by reason was deemed true; everything else was considered blind
faith or, at best, conjecture." Miracles were explained away as magic tricks. The Trinity
was rejected because it was deemed illogical. The idea of biblical revelation was considered
nonsense. Enlightenment thinkers credited themselves with courageously breaking with
tradition, rejecting religious authority, and trusting only their own experience and reason.
Meanwhile, science was flourishing. Through observation, formulating hypotheses, and
experimentation, people gained a greater understanding
of the world. Isaac Newton led the way in championing
scientific discovery and exploration of the natural world.
While Newton affirmed God's existence as Creator,
some scientists believed Newton's work showed that the
world could be completely explained through cause and
effect. Hence, some people believed there was no longer
any need for an active, personal God. They thought the
universe could be explained through scientific reasoning,
and God's purposes no longer mattered.
Confidence grew in the human ability to understand
& modernism:: o*®
a movement...
promoting 0) 2(0) -0)e. (2)
confidence in
rationalism and
science, as well
as skepticism of
supernatural and
religious authorities
and rebuild the world apart from religious influence.
This confidence gave birth to the modern era, or
modernism, a movement promoting confidence in rationalism and science, as well as
skepticism of supernatural and religious authorities.
Christian philosopher Francis Schaeffer explained the modern view of truth using a
simple model, which we have modified for our purposes!?
In the lower story, objective truth is found through the scientific method. The
discoveries of science are rational, verifiable, and true for everyone. The upper story is for
values, morals, and religious convictions, which (according to modernism) are subjective,
nonrational, and nonverifiable. As Nancy Pearcey explains the modernism view of truth,
"Religion is not considered an objective truth to which we submit, but only a matter of
personal taste which we choose."13 This view of truth has created a sharp divide between
public and private life. Religion, it is argued by some, is to be excluded from public
discourse as it is merely a matter of personal preference. And science, according to this
view, should be paramount in shaping public policy as it is rational and objective.
Values, Morals, and Religion
(subjective, nonrational,
nonverifiable)
Scientific Knowledge
(objective, rational, verifiable)
CHAPTER 8 | 127


<!-- page-5 -->

6. Postmodernism: Truth Cannot Be Known
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to contrast modernism with postmodernism.
In 1882, a German philosopher named Friedrich Nietzsche published "The Parable of
the Madman." It is a brief story about a "madman" who has a shocking and devastating
message to tell. Here is his message:
Whither is God? I will tell you. We have killed him—you and I. All of us are his
murderers. But how did we do this? How could we drink up the sea? Who gave us the
sponge to wipe away the entire horizon? What were we doing when we unchained this
earth from its sun? Whither is it moving now? Whither are we moving? Away from all
suns? Are we not plunging continually? Backward, sideward, forward, in all directions?
Is there still any up or down? Are we not straying, as through an infinite nothing?
Do we not feel the breath of empty space? Has it not become colder? Is not night
continually closing in on us? Do we not need to light lanterns in the morning? Do we
hear nothing as yet of the noise of the gravediggers who are burying God? Do we smell
nothing as yet of the divine decomposition? Gods, too, decompose. God is dead. God
remains dead. And we have killed him.
Nietzsche wasn't trying to say that God had
once literally existed or that we had actually
• postmodernism:
a worldview that teaches
there is no defining source
for truth and reality
killed him. For Nietzsche, God was merely
an idea that had given the universe stability
but was now, he believed, unnecessary. For
centuries, God's revelation had served as a
trustworthy guide to truth. Then, modernism
had essentially killed God by declaring him
unnecessary and enthroning human reason
instead. While Nietzsche thought that God's
death was good news, he also recognized its
devastating implications. He foresaw the failure
of modernism and the chaos that would ensue
in a world without God. He could not have
been more correct.
Throughout the twentieth century, events like World Wars I and II, the Armenian
genocide, the Holocaust, Mao's Cultural Revolution, the Cambodian genocide, and many
other horrors led to pessimism about humanity's ability to remake the world through
reason and science. People found that science—though incredibly helpful for explaining
the world —had little to say about the world's purpose or how we should live. Science and
technological progress have not made people better humans nor made the world a utopia.
Instead, the same science used to save lives was also used to destroy them.
In light of these events, disillusion with modernism grew. In its place, a new movement
emerged called postmodernism, a worldview that teaches there is no defining source for
truth and reality.
Instead of turning back to divine revelation, postmodernists abandoned the quest for
a truth that could make sense of all reality. They said metanarratives cannot show us the
purpose of life or the nature of reality, including the Christian and modernist metantratives
of the inevitability of human progress through science. For postmodernists, there is no
objective truth, and reality is just a matter of perspective, which is subjective at best.
Postmodernism is self-defeating and leads to chaos. In postmodernism, we all have
limited experiences and cannot say what is true for anyone else. This means, to the
postmodernist, there is no truth to discover out there. Instead, each person constructs
subjective truth claims as he or she sees fit. The postmodernist believes that, in the end,
our knowledge about the world cannot be objectively true; it is merely a matter of opinion.
Furthermore, the postmodernist believes no authority (religious or otherwise) can tell us
what is true, and anyone who tries to tell us what is true is simply trying to gain power or
privilege. Thus, postmodernism dismisses all truth claims, leaving Pilates question, "What
is truth?" unanswered.
7. Relativism: Truth Is Individual and Cultural
› OBJECTIVE: You will be able to summarize relativism and how it influences
popular views of truth.
Postmodern thinking has a strong influence on a popular notion called relativism, the belief
that truth, knowledge, or morality is relative to the individual, society, or historical context.
Relativism asserts that truth and morality are
not fixed points we can discover through careful
investigation. Instead, since relativism identifies no
objective truth that applies to all people at all times
and places, right and wrong are entirely dependent
MY
on the individual or the culture. Authors Francis
Y0UR
THEIR
Beckwith and Gregory Koukl put it this way: "Today
we ve lost confidence that statements of fact can ever
be anything more than just opinions; we no longer
know that anything is certain beyond our subjective
preferences. The word truth now means true for me'
and nothing more."'S This is relativism. Let's consider
& relativism: the belief
that truth, knowledge,
or morality is relative to
the individual, society, or
historical context
two relativistic views of truth.
Truth is individual. In relativism, the postmodern
skepticism toward metanarratives and the Western emphasis on individual autonomy
combine to form the idea that what is true and moral is entirely up to the individual.
Each person gets to decide for himself or herself what is right and wrong. This is often
expressed in popular phrases like "Live your truth," "You do you," and "Don't let anyone
tell you what to do, just be yourself." Such statements encourage us to look inward while
simultaneously deemphasizing or ignoring the important role of faich, the Bible, history,
authority, and community in shaping our beliefs about truth.
128 | CHAPTER 8
CHAPTER 8 | 129


<!-- page-6 -->

Relativism accepts the modernist idea that religion should be privatized and the
postmodern notion that it is impossible for anyone to have an objective standpoint from
which to determine what is universally true. So, many people see it as arrogant, rude, or
insensitive when others try to tell them what is true or moral. They believe that truth is
just a matter of opinion and that "your truth" can be discovered only by looking inward.
They also believe that looking to others for truth is surrendering your identity and
authority.
The influence of relativism can be seen today in the debate about gender identity.
Gender, according to some, is merely a social construct, not an objective biological reality.
Therefore, a relativist viewpoint says each person is free to decide what gender he or she
will be. Such views are possible in relativism because "each person creates his or her own
reality ... truth is just one person's interpretation." A relativist views people as free to
remake reality however they choose.
Truth is cultural. Another form of relativism is cultural relativism. In this view, what
is true is determined by one's culture. After all, every culture has a different worldview,
religion, and moral code. Who's to say which is right? Why not say they're all right?
Consider religious beliefs, which are strongly influenced by the particular culture in which
a person is raised. For many religious Americans, Christianity is true. However, for those
living in Indonesia, Islam is true, while those
raised in India often believe that Hinduism is
true. Cultural relativism says that each culture
has its own understanding of truth and that
each of these understandings is equally valid
and acceptable.
To a cultural relativist, critiquing others'
truth or morals is a form of arrogance and even
oppression. To proclaim that there is a truth
that applies to all cultures, like Christianity
does, is seen by some as an attempt to eliminate
diversity and obstruct a culture's distinctive
practices. Furthermore, for the relativist, saying
your culture's truth applies to everyone is not only arrogant, but also foolish. We've no
business judging Islam, they say, because if we were born in Indonesia, we would probably
be Muslims too. Thus, a relativist views every culture's truth claim as valid, but only for
that culture. It is not valid if applied to anyone else.
8. A Christian Response to Other Views of Truth
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to compose a Christian worldview response to
modernist, postmodernist, and relativist views of truth.
Many people today are influenced by popular ideas of modernism, postmodernism, and
relativism. In this section, we'll offer a brief response to each view.
Response to modernism: Christianity affirms the importance of reason and science in
the quest for truth. Indeed, we ought to seek reasonable and (when relevant) scientific
justification for our Christian beliefs. The error of modernism is not in using these tools
but in assuming that these tools eliminate the need for faith in the God who created
everything. Modernism has attempted to replace faith in God with faith
in the human mind and science, and it is by no means evident that these
provide a more adequate foundation for truth.
Science has unlocked a great deal of truth about the universe. Yet, it
leads to only partial knowledge. As Rabbi Jonathan Sacks said, "Science will
explain how but not why. It talks about what is, not what ought to be.... It
can tell us about causes but it cannot tell us about purposes." For example,
science can tell us how the human body works, but it cannot tell us what the
human body is for. To know the human body's purpose, we need additional
knowledge from its Designer. So, science makes objective claims about how
things work while God's Word makes objective claims about his purposes for
the human body and all that he created. Treating scientific discoveries as the
only objective truths while relegating biblical faith to the realm of personal
preference arbitrarily limits the scope of knowledge.
The biblical Christian worldview says that "Truth (capital T) can be known objectively
through reason and revelation."| The Truth exists and is grounded in the Bible, supported
by faithful writers and thinkers, and established as knowable. It is not relative or variable
because Truth is a person, Jesus. "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was
with God and the Word was God. He was in the beginning with God" (John 1:1-2). The
power of Truth to transform lives is evidenced not only in reality, science, and reason, but
in countless lives faithfully committed to Truth in Jesus. "It demonstrates how their faith
formed a personal moral code but also a transformational worldview that changed the
course of history." 19
Response to postmodernism: The postmodernist critique of modernism has emphasized
the need for humility about the limits of our knowledge. It has also demonstrated how
context, culture, and presuppositions affect how we see truth. These are points to
consider but saying that we can't truly know anything because our presuppositions
taint our knowledge goes too far. We can
look honestly at our presuppositions and
evaluate them in light of evidence and
other perspectives. Indeed, this is one of
the reasons it is so important to interact
with people who do not believe like we
do. Diversity of belief doesn't exclude the
possibility of truth. Encountering a different
belief system can foster more careful
thinking about what is true and how we can
know it is true.
130 | CHAPTER 8
• Truth and Tolerance
Rabbi Jonathan
Sacks, 2022
CHAPTER 8| 131


<!-- page-7 -->

Postmodernism offers no real answers in the quest for objective truth and meaning
because it excludes the possibility that any metanarrative can reveal truth. Yet
postmodernists have unwittingly put forth their own metanarrative: no metanarratives
can be trusted except the postmodern one. To say that no metanarrative can reveal truth is
a metanarrative and a statement about truth. This reveals the postmodern metanarrative as
illogical.
We can know what we believe as Christians with knowledge that is based on logical
reasons. We can also grow deeper in our understanding of the influence and ideas in
postmodernism that challenge Christianity and prepare to respond with biblical truth.
"See to it that no one takes you captive through hollow and deceptive philosophy, which
depends on human tradition and the elemental spiritual forces of this world rather than
on Christ." (Colossians 2:8, NIV). The Christian worldview offers knowledge based
on reality because the Bible is a continuing and consistent metanarrative from creation
through the prophesy of the end times that is inspired and guided by the Holy Spirit
(2 Peter 1:20-21). The accuracy of the biblical manuscripts provides evidence for the
Bible's authenticity and power to change lives.2° We can know God, we can know truth,
and we can know God's purpose for our lives.
Response to relativism: One of the main problems with relativism is that no one can be
a true relativist. If you were to steal the wallet of a relativist, it is doubtful that he or she
would simply respond, "Yes that's fine, I understand that for you it is right to steal wallets.
I don't agree with you, but I recognize your right to determine what is right and wrong for
yourself." More likely, that person would chase you down, call the police, and say, "That's
wrong!" However, in taking such steps, that individual affirms a belief in universal right
and wrong, demonstrating that he or
she is not a true relativist.
We know in our gut that certain
things like theft, murder, and torture
are objectively wrong. But if relativism
is true, no one has the right to say that
another person's actions or cultural
practices are wrong, no matter how
evil they might be. A consistent
relativist has to say that it is none
of our business to interfere, even in
these situations. Furthermore, if each
culture is free to create its truth, and if every individual is free to decide what is right and
wrong, what happens when two different beliefs clash? If there is no objective standard to
decide between them, the person or culture with the most power will decide what is right
for everyone else.
The Christian worldview's response to relativism is a gracious reminder that truth is the
foundation for life. To say there are no absolute truths is to make a statement that in itself
presents an absolute and therefore contradictory— this is called a selfrefuting daim. This
is why Jesus prayed for his disciples that God the Father would "make them holy by your
truth; teach them your word, which is truth" (John 17.17, NLT).
9. Tolerance
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to
express what tolerance is and how
to practice it.
In a culture strongly influenced by
modernism, postmodernism, and
relativism, critiquing or disagreeing
with someone else's religious beliefs
or morals is frequently considered
& tolerance:
the willingness
to recognize
and respect the
dignity of those
with whom one
disagrees
arrogant and insensitive. Christians
who want to share Jesus with others
find themselves in a difficult place. They cannot remain silent about their faith, yet trying
to persuade others is often considered intolerant. To understand this problem, let's look at
the word tolerance. Today, it is understood as agreeing that everyone's beliefs are equally
true and valid. However, tolerance has traditionally meant the willingness to recognize and
respect the dignity of those with whom one disagrees.
For true tolerance, there must be at least two people who disagree. In fact, it is the
disagreements between people that make tolerance so important. Without them, there
would be no need for tolerance.? Furthermore, tolerance requires that we treat the people
with whom we disagree with dignity and respect. We cannot attempt to silence them,
remove them from the conversation, or otherwise abuse their dignity. Apologist Greg Koukl
sums it up, "Classic tolerance requires that every person be free to express his [or her) ideas
without fear of abuse or reprisal, not that all views have equal validity, merit, or truth."2
Practicing tolerance in the traditional sense is essential if people who disagree are to live
in peace. It is a critical virtue in a diverse society. Christians, believing that all people bear
God's image, should be the most tolerant of all. Yet, the Christian view of tolerance goes
beyond the classic definition in at least three ways.
First, Jesus said, "Judge not, that you be not judged" (Matthew 7:1). In the following
verses, Jesus calls out those who want to point out sins in other people while ignoring their
own. According to Jesus, we must get the "log" out of our own eye before we try to get the
"speck" out of our brother's. So, the instruction here is not for us to avoid any judgments
(notice that the person rightly sees the speck in the brother's eye and makes the judgment
that it needs to be removed). Instead, Jesus wants us first to examine ourselves and be
aware of hypocrisy. Christians are to approach disagreements with honest self reflection
and humility.
Second, we need to remember that we are engaged in a spiritual battle (Ephesians
6:10-18). In addition to fighting spiritual powers, we must also battle "enmity (hostility,
strife, jealousy, fits of anger, rivalries, dissensions, divisions, [and! envy" (Galatians 5:20-21).
Harsh words, rude comments, and cruel speech designed to provoke have no place in our
communication. Instead, we are to act out of the fruit of the Holy Spirit: "love, joy, peace,
patience, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, gentleness, [and] self-control" (Galatians 5:22-23).
132 | CHAPTER 8
CHAPTER 8 | 133


<!-- page-8 -->

Empowered by God's Spirit, we will respect other people's dignity, even when we disagree,
and even when it is difficult (Galatians 5:24-26).
Finally, Christians are commanded to do more than simply tolerate those they disagree
with. We are to love them as Jesus does. It is easy to love those who love you, but what
about your enemies? Jesus said, "Love your enemies... and your reward will be great,
and you will be sons of the Most High, for he is kind to the ungrateful and the evil. Be
merciful, even as your Father is merciful" (Luke 6:35-36). The love Jesus calls us to is
others-centered, self-sacrificial, and freely given. Our calling to love also means we must
stand against ideas that would harm others, abuse their dignity, or cause suffering. In the
end, tolerance is a virtue, but love matters most.
10. Conclusion
Where does this leave us with Pilate's question, "What is truth?" We have seen that the
Christian answer to this question centers on Jesus. We can know the truth because God
revealed it to us in Jesus and confirmed it through the Holy Spirit and in Scripture.
Furthermore, God reveals himself in the natural world and our conscience, providing
essential clues that can lead us to the truth.
Far from limiting our quest for truth by
demanding blind assent to a set of religious
doctrines, Christianity provides the broadest
possible canvas within which we can explore
truth. God created us to use all our faculties
to pursue truth, and we acknowledge that all
truth belongs to God wherever it is found.
So, with modernism, we affirm the power of
human reason and the high value of scientific
discovery. Yet, unlike modernism, we maintain
that full knowledge requires trust in God
and his revelation. With postmodernism, we
acknowledge that our ability to know the truth
is limited and that the way we perceive the truth is influenced by our context. Yet, unlike
postmodernism, we maintain that truth can be known and that our search for it is aided
by investigating our presuppositions and conversing with those with whom we disagree.
And finally, with relativism, we acknowledge the diversity of beliefs between individuals
and cultures, yet we disagree that all beliefs are equally true. We maintain that there are
truths that transcend our individual and cultural preferences.
In this chapter, we argued that the Christian view of truth corresponds with how the
world is, while advocating tolerance and love for those who disagree. We also pointed out
flaws in other ways of thinking about the truth. It is important that we discern errors in
other viewpoints, yet pointing out errors is not enough. Consider this example: Sara says,
"There is no such thing as truth." You then respond by pointing out that her statement is
self-refuting; "There is no such thing as truth" is, in fact, a statement about truth. What
134 | CHAPTER 8
happens next? Will she say, "You know what, you re right. My view is illogical, and I'd
better change it? It would be great if she did, but this is often not what happens.
Many people are okay with their beliefs being inconsistent or illogical. They have
not really thought through their beliefs or that "truth" isn't their ultimate concern. As
much as people want to know what is true, they also want to know that their beliefs
have meaning and can help them purposefully live in the world. They want to know that
their beliefs will lead to some kind of fulfillment. So, you may convince someone that
Christianity is theoretically true, but if they do not see Christianity as meaningful to their
lives, they are unlikely to be fully persuaded.
This is why we endeavor to show people that Christianity not only makes sense of the
world but also offers a way of life that is both meaningful and fulflling. We get to tell the
biblical story in a way that brings out the full meaning of God's revelation as something
meaningful, both for this world and the hereafter. We critique other views, but we cannot
leave it at that. We also have the privilege of showing people how Christianity offers them
what they are really looking for.
In the next chapter, we'll continue our investigation of truth as we consider the issue of
religious pluralism.
ENDNOTES - 8
1 See Jonathan Morrow, Think Christianly: Looking at the Intersection of Faith and Culture (Grand Rapids, MI:
Zondervan, 2011), 95.
2 Simon Worrall, "The Hunt for Vulcan, the Planet That Wasn't There," National Geographic, November
4, 2015, nationalgeographic.com/science/article/151104-newton-einstein-gravity-vulcan-planets-mercury-
astronomy-theory-of-relativity-ngbooktalk
3 Alisa Childers, Live Your Truth and Other Lies: Exposing Popular Deceptions That Make Us Anxious,
Exhausted, and Self-Obsessed (Carol Stream, IL: Tyndale Momentum, 2022) 25.
* Lesslie Newbigin, The Gospel in a Pluralist Society (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 1989), 35.
5 Newbigin, Gospel in a Pluralist Society, 23.
6 Childers, Live Your Truth and Other Lies, 27.
7 W. Gary Phillips, William E. Brown, and John Stonestreet, Making Sense of Your World: A Biblical
Worldview (Salem, WI: Sheffield Publishing Company, 2008), chap. 3.
8 Richard H. Beis, "Some Contributions of Anthropology to Ethics," The Thomist 27, no. 2 (April 1964):
174-223, quoted in William D. Gairdner, The Book of Absolutes: A Critique of Relativism and a Defence of
Universals (Montreal: McGill-Queen's University Press, 2008), 198-200.
' James Davison Hunter and Paul Nedelisky, Science and the Good: The Tragic Quest for the Foundations of
Morality (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2018), 30.
10 Norman L. Geisler, The Big Book of Christian Apologetics: An A to Z Guide (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker
Books, 2012), 122-123.
"'Lesslie Newbigin, Proper Confidence: Faich, Doubi, and Certainty in Christian Discipleship (Grand Rapids,
MI: Eerdmans, 1995), 21.
12 Nancy Pearcey, Total Truth: Liberating Christianity from Its Cultural Captivity (Wheaton, IL: Crossway,
2005), 20-21.
13 Pearcey, Total Truth, 20.
14 Friedrich Niersche. The Gav Science, trans. Walter Kaufmann (New York: Random House, 1974), 181.
The word gay in this title does not mean homosexual. Rather, it is used in its older sense, meaning carefree or
cheerful. That is why the title of Nietzsche's work is sometimes translated as The Joyous Science.
15 Francis ]. Beckwich and Gregory Kouk, Relativism: Feet Firmly Planted in Mid-Air (Grand Rapids, MI:
Baker Books, 1998), 20.
" James K. Beilby, Thinking About Christian Apologetics: What It Is and Why We Do I (Downers Grove, IL:
S Truth and Tolerance
CHAPTER 8 | 135


<!-- page-9 (book p.137) -->

IVP Academic, 2011), 123.
" Jonathan Sacks, "The Limits of Secularism," rabbisacks.org, January 12, 2012, rabbisacks.org/archive/the-
limits-of-secularism/
18 Jeff Myers, Truth Changes Everything (Grand Rapid, MI: Baker Books, 2022) 9.
19 Myers, Truth Changes Everything, 10.
20 Norman L. Geisler and Jason Jimenez, The Bible's Answers to 100 of Life's Biggest Questions (Grand Rapid,
MI: Baker Books, 2015), 53-55.
21 Paul Copan, True for You, But Not for Me (Minneapolis, MN: Bethany House Publishers, 2009), 45.
22 Greg Koukl, "The Irony of Intolerance," in Kelly Monroe Kullberg and Lael Arrington, A Faith and
Culture Daily Devotional: Daily Readings in Art, Science, and Life (Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2008), 101.
Religion Roundup
1. Does Religious Truth Matter?
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to differentiate Christianity from a common view
of religious truth.
Yann Martel's most famous novel, Life of Pi, tells the story of Pi, a young Indian boy who
has an extraordinary adventure. In his early years, Pi becomes fascinated with religion.
From his mother, he learns about Hindu gods including Krishna, Vishnu, and many
others. Then, he discovers Jesus and is inspired by his great love. Later, he encounters
Islam, in which he finds inner peace and brotherhood. Eventually, Pi becomes a practicing
Christian, Hindu, and Muslim all at the same time.
136 | CHAPTER 8
