# Chapter 9

<!-- page-1 (book p.137) -->

IVP Academic, 2011), 123.
" Jonathan Sacks, "The Limits of Secularism," rabbisacks.org, January 12, 2012, rabbisacks.org/archive/the-
limits-of-secularism/
1 Jeff Myers, Truth Changes Everything (Grand Rapid, MI: Baker Books, 2022) 9.
19 Myers, Truth Changes Everything, 10.
20 Norman L. Geisler and Jason Jimenez, The Bible's Answers to 100 of Life's Biggest Questions (Grand Rapid,
MI: Baker Books, 2015), 53-55.
21 Paul Copan, True for You, But Not for Me (Minneapolis, MN: Bethany House Publishers, 2009), 45.
22 Greg Koukl, "The Irony of Intolerance," in Kelly Monroe Kullberg and Lael Arrington, A Faith and
Culture Daily Devotional: Daily Readings in Art, Science, and Life (Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2008), 101.
Religion Roundup
1. Does Religious Truth Matter?
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to differentiate Christianity from a common view
of religious truth.
Yann Martel's most famous novel, Life of Pi, tells the story of Pi, a young Indian boy who
has an extraordinary adventure. In his early years, Pi becomes fascinated with religion.
From his mother, he learns about Hindu gods including Krishna, Vishnu, and many
others. Then, he discovers Jesus and is inspired by his great love. Later, he encounters
Islam, in which he finds inner peace and brotherhood. Eventually, Pi becomes a practicing
Christian, Hindu, and Muslim all at the same time.
136 | CHAPTER 8


<!-- page-2 -->

One day, in the town square, Pi encounters a Christian priest, a Muslim
imam, and a Hindu pandit. An argument ensues:
Priest: "[Pi] is a good Christian boy. I hope to see him join our choir soon."
Imam: "You must be mistaken. He's a good Muslim boy. He comes
without fail to Friday prayer, and his knowledge of the Holy Quran is
coming along nicely."
Pandit: "You're both wrong. He's a good Hindu boy. I see him all the time
at the temple coming for darshan and performing puja."
Confused and frustrated, Pi exclaims, "Bapu Gandhi said, 'All religions are true? I just
want to love God."2 This sentiment expresses how many people feel about religion today.
But Pi's story is not done yet.
Pi's life drastically turns when his family travels to Canada in a boat full of zoo
animals. While at sea, a great storm sinks the boat, leaving Pi stranded with a tiger on a
life raft. What follows is a bizarre adventure beyond belief. Indeed, after Pi is rescued and
the owners of the sunken ship investigate Pi's story, they refuse to believe it. So, Pi tells
them another story without the tiger, one that is much more realistic but brutal, shocking,
and violent. In the end, he asks the owners: since they can't prove which story is true,
which story do they prefer? Of course, they prefer the story about the tiger. Pi replies,
"Thank you. And so it goes with God."3
Life of Pi struck a chord with people because it reflects something many would like
to believe—the idea that all religions lead to God. The novel suggests that each religion
contributes to our understanding of the world, but no one religion has the whole picture.
In putting forward this notion, Life of Pi simplies that the truth of any one religion really
doesn't matter. In the end, the novel suggests that what happened to Pi isn't all that
important. What matters is that he told a good story. It is the same, some believe, with
religion. It doesn't matter whether a religion is true, but it should be a good story that
gives meaning to your life. All religions are true and acceptable so long as you do not act
like your religion is true for anyone else.
How do these ideas line up
with the actual beliefs of religious
people? Are religions only nice
stories people have told themselves
to help them feel better about their
lives and provide meaning in an
otherwise meaningless world? Are
all religions equally true? Do all
religions lead to the same place? As
Christians, how should we talk to
those of other religions? These are
the questions we'll explore in this
chapter.
2. Religious Terminology
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to explain how a
religion or a cult differs from a worldview.
What is a religion? Before the seventeenth century,
religion referred primarily to "interior acts of devotion
and prayer." It was mostly about worship rather than
doctrine. Today, the term religion designates various
systems of belief, the institutions that support the beliefs,
as well as religious leaders, rules, rituals, and places of
6 religion:
a specific system of belief,
worship, or conduct that
prescribes certain responses
to the sacred, divine, or
supernatural
worship including churches, temples, and mosques. Each
element is crucial to understanding the many religions
in the world today. Religion, then, may be defined as a
specific system of belief, worship, or conduct that prescribes
certain responses to the sacred, divine, or supernatural.
Some think only groups like Christians, Muslims, or Hindus are religious. After all,
many people are clearly not religious—they do not believe in a sacred realm, worship a
divine being, or participate in religious institutions. Yet all human beings are religious
in the sense that we end up worshipping someone or something-knowledge, pleasure,
money, accomplishments, power, fame, sex, another person, or even ourselves. In Scripture,
worshiping entities, ideas, or objects other than God is called idolatry. John Calvin even
said that human nature is "a perpetual factory of idols." According to Scripture, it is
essential that we worship the Lord because we will become like whatever we worship
(Psalm 115:2-8). In this sense, religion should be a matter of concern for everyone.
How is religion different from a worldview? The key difference concerns the human
response to the sacred, divine, or supernatural. Take worship, for example. Someone can
worship Jesus in his or her heart but not have a Christian worldview. Despite believing in
Jesus, these people may hold to a largely secular worldview in other areas. The opposite
is also possible. Many people seem to have a Christian worldview. They believe in a
divine being and largely agree with Christian
assumptions about philosophy, morality, and
& cult:
a system of religious
veneration and devotion
directed toward a particular
figure or object
other topics. But in terms of religion, they are
not Christians because they do not believe the
gospel or worship Jesus as Lord.
Similar to a religion, the word cult refers
to a system of religious veneration and devotion
directed toward a particular figure or object.
How is a religion different from a cult? In
some ways, it isn't. Cult is simply one of many
words that may be used to describe a religion
(along with terms like sect, creed, faith, church, and denomination). The term may also
describe a divergent group within a larger religious body, a new religious movement, or
CHAPTER 9
| 139
| CHAPTER 9
APOLOGETICS G


<!-- page-3 -->

an alternative religion. It may also be applied outside of a religious context. For example,
think of a movie that has a "cult" following.
In widespread use, the term cult usually has a negative connotation. It is frequently
applied to groups that fixate on a striking leader or a particular doctrine and then break
off from an already established religious body. For example, Latter-Day Saints, Jehovah's
Witnesses, and Christian Science are all cults that formed out of Christianity. These types
of cults sometimes look very similar to the dominant religious group from which they
arose but usually deny or reinterpret that religion's central doctrines.
Some cults go much further, engaging in abusive leadership, extreme rituals, and
sometimes even violence. These cults usually encourage a high degree of confidence in one
leader, who often holds exclusive and unquestioned authority within the cult. Sometimes,
this confidence borders on worship. The cult leader may demand strict conformity,
threaten punishment for disobedience, or claim to offer secret knowledge to those who
are loyal. Portions of sacred texts are often isolated from their context and used to support
the cult leader's agenda. Disagreement and critical thinking are frowned upon. These cults
tend to be highly sectarian, believing that only those initiated into the cult are truly saved
or enlightened.
3. Religious Pluralism
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to describe two perspectives on religious
pluralism.
The sheer diversity of beliefs in the world today can be overwhelming. The world's major
religions—Christianity, Judaism, Islam, Hinduism, Buddhism, and others-
-now have a
global reach. As religious diversity has increased worldwide,
exposure to beliefs different from ours has become more
common, especially in the West. A name has been given to
s religious
nluralism:
the state of
affairs in which
many different
religions exist
side by side
in society
this phenomenon: religious pluralism, the state of affairs in
which many different religions exist side-by-side in society.
Two approaches to religious pluralism exist; both
acknowledge the need for tolerance. However, they differ in
why they think we should be tolerant and how they define
tolerance.
The first approach to religious pluralism says that we
should be tolerant of other religions to respect the dignity
and freedom of all people, maintain peace in society, and
work for the common good. Those who take this view do not
necessarily see religious pluralism as bad. However, because
they do not believe all religions are equally true, they
recognize that conflict is bound to occur. These conflicts,
they believe, must be civil. Adopting a classical definition of
tolerance, they argue that we should respect the rights of others to choose their religion.
At the same time, we should be free to debate and disagree so long as we are tolerant of
one another.
Those who hold to the second approach to religious pluralism also believe in respecting
the dignity of all people, maintaining peace, and working for the common good. But they
go one step further, arguing that we should be tolerant because all religions are basically
true for those who believe them. For those who adopt this modern definition of tolerance,
disagreement and debate about what is true are frowned upon.
The argument for this approach to pluralism is often illustrated with a folktale called
"The Blind Men and the Elephant." The story tells of six blind men who encounter an
elephant in a prince's palace. Each man approaches the elephant, not knowing what it is.
One man gets hold of the trunk and thinks the elephant is like a giant snake. One touches
the tusks and believes the elephant is like a spear. Another touches the elephant's four legs
and believes it is a large cow. Of course, an argument ensues, which is only settled when
the prince suggests that since none can be sure they are correct, they should try putting
their ideas together to come up with the truth. The parable is used as an argument for the
equality of all religions. The blind
men are like the many religions of the
world-Buddhism, Christianity, Islam,
and so on. Each religion, it is claimed,
has part of the truth but is also limited.
This argument assumes no one religion
has the whole truth. Therefore, the idea
is that no one religion can be true for
everyone.
Another way of saying this is,
"all roads lead to the mountaintop."
Suppose you and your friends are
climbing a mountain. There are several
ways one might take to get to the top. Does it really matter which path you take? After
all, everyone gets to the mountaintop. A pluralistic approach applies this idea to religion,
claiming that no one religion needs to be true for everyone because they are all paths
leading to the same place.
On the surface, these illustrations may seem appealing. After all, don't such ideas
make sense of the religious diversity we see in the world? If only one religion is true, that
would mean that millions of people are misguided. That is an ugly notion. Surely, it is
better to say that all religious paths are equal. Let's examine these ideas more carefully in
the next section.
4. Critiquing Misguided Notions of Religious
Pluralism
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to assess misguided notions of religious pluralism.
The late religious philosopher John Hick had a significant infuence on the way people
think about religious pluralism in the West. During his teenage years, Hick accepted a
140 | CHAPTER 9
APOLOGETICS S
Road sign, South
Tyrol, Italy
CHAPTER 9 141


<!-- page-4 -->

form of evangelical Christianity. Later, when he became a university professor, he met
religious people from all over the world-Hindus, Sikhs, Muslims, and others. Hick
discovered that many of these people were better people than he considered himself to be.
How, he wondered, could they be excluded from salvation, especially when so many had
not even heard of Christianity to begin with?? These questions would eventually lead Hick
to abandon the idea that Christianity is objectively true for everyone.
Instead, Hick put forth the notion of the Real as the source of all the world's religions.
Each person views the Real differently based on that person's cultural assumptions. But
even if religions come to contradictory conclusions about the Real, no one is necessarily
wrong. How can this be? Hick says,
[The Real] cannot be said to be one or many, person or thing, conscious or
unconscious, purposive or nonpurposive, substance or process, good or evil, loving or
hating. None of these descriptive terms apply literally to the unexperienceable reality
that underlies that realm.?
For Hick, all religions are true in
that they derive from the Real. This
sounds nice, but there is a problem.
Apologist Douglas Groothuis observes
that if the Real is unknowable, there
is no good reason to think it explains
the diversity of world religions.®
Furthermore, how does Hick know
what he knows about the Real since
it cannot be defined or experienced?
How can he know that all religions
are derived from it if its characteristics
are unknowable? It seems Hick is
suggesting that although no one religion has the whole truth, he does have it. Hick claims
a God's-eye view of truth, a position from which he can see that no one else has it quite
right?
Consider again the parable of the elephant. The parable is meant to teach that no
one has full access to the truth. However, notice that in the story, there is someone who
does have access to it. The prince can see the elephant for what it truly is. What does all
this mean? Simply this: those who affirm that "no one religion has the full truth" or "all
religions are part of the same truth" may sound humble and inclusive. Still, they claim
their own position is utterly true while dismissing religions as only partly true.
Such statements are both logically inconsistent and disrespectful. As we will see,
religions have many conflicting beliefs—different understandings of God or the sacred
realm, different ways of addressing our problems, and different goals. Given these
differences, it is logically possible that all religions could be false, but it is not possible
that they are all true. Take one example: Christians believe that at the return of Jesus,
Christians will be given new bodies to rule and reign with Jesus in a restored heaven
and earth for all eternity (1 Corinthians 15:51-52, 2 Timothy 2:11-13, Revelation 21:1).
Buddhists say that after death, those who escape the wheel of reincarnation and reach the
state of nirvana will lose all individuality and become one with the cosmos. There are, of
course, surface similarities between these views (both represent a blissful state). Yet, these
two concepts of life after death are vastly different. One rejects the physical world, while
the other embraces it. Suggesting that new creation and nirvana are the same fails to take
these beliefs and those who hold them seriously. Showing true tolerance and love requires
that we try to understand our differences. We are not to act as though differences don't
exist or are irrelevant.
In the end, this second approach to religious pluralism delegitimizes all religions and
sets up a new religion in their place—one characterized by acceptance of all beliefs. It
sounds tolerant, but in fact, it doesn't take religion very seriously at all.
5. Religions of the World Part 1
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to describe the key tenets of Judaism, Islam,
Hinduism, and Buddhism.
We have argued that the statement, "All religions are basically true" is false, not least
because various religions have many conflicting beliefs. In the following sections, we will
see this great diversity of beliefs as we look at snapshots of the world's major non-Christian
religions and other religious movements, practices, and cults.
Judaism. Judaism emerged in the Middle East with Abraham and his descendants.
It is the oldest of three major monotheistic faiths (Judaism, Christianity, and Islam).
Traditionally, Jews believe in one Creator God
who is utterly holy, separate from his creation,
and yet intimately involved in history. Human
beings were created in God's image. To share
in God's kingdom life both now and in the
hereafter, Jews must be faithful to the laws of
the Torah. Gentiles must follow the Noahic
laws given to all humanity according to the
Talmud. (These seven laws are similar to the Ten
Commandments.) Judaism has many different
branches today, with each branch emphasizing
something different—ethics, law, tradition,
culture, ethnicity, or Jewish statehood.° This
makes it very difficult to identify the shared beliefs of Judaism. Generally, Judaism is more
easily defined by actions like justice, righteousness, and compassion.
142 | CHAPTER 9
CHAPTER 9 | 143


<!-- page-5 -->

Holi, a Hindu
festival
Islam. Islam is a monotheistic faith in which Allah's unity, supremacy, and holiness are
paramount. The word Islam means submission and can imply peace, specifically, "the peace
that comes when one's life is surrendered to God."'' God is known by his Arabic name,
Allah, and followers of Islam are called Muslims. According to Islam, Allah has revealed
his will to humans through prophets such as Abraham, Moses, and David. The most
important prophet was Muhammad (AD 571-632), who received God's revelation of the
Quran and brought religious reform across Arabia. Muslims seek to live in conformity with
Allah's law. This includes following the five pillars of Islam—confession of belief, prayer,
fasting, giving, and pilgrimage. At the end of time, a person's good deeds will be weighed
against his or her bad deeds. If the good outweighs the bad, the person may enter paradise
to be with Allah. Otherwise, he or she will be sent away for judgment.
Hinduism. Hinduism is perhaps the world's most ancient polytheistic religion. It has
no single founder and is welcoming of diverse points of view. There are approximately
330 million gods in Hinduism, though all of them may be seen as manifestations of a
single god (Brahman), who is not distinct from ultimate reality. In the Advaita Vedanta
tradition, each human being is ultimately part of the divine but is currently imprisoned
in a cycle of reincarnation in this illusory material world.!' To escape this cycle, we must
become sufficiently enlightened to reconnect with the divine unity of the cosmos (moksha).
We may take one of four yogic paths-knowledge, love, work, and psychophysical
exercises. (Yogic is the adjective from
yoga, meaning "a method of training
designed to lead to integration or
union."13) Each good or bad action
we do in this life will have a positive
or negative effect in this life or on our
next life. This effect is known as karma.
If, at death, we have not achieved
moksha, we will reincarnate to
continue the journey toward liberation.
Buddhism. Founded by Siddhartha
Gautama (the Buddha) sometime
between the 600-300 c, Buddhism
shares some similarities with its
parent religion, Hinduism. The goal
of Buddhism is to reach enlightenment, thus escaping the endless cycle of birth and
rebirth (samsara) and the suffering that accompanies this present life. The material world
is not ultimately real. All that exists is pure consciousness, and we join it by following the
eightfold path to enlightenment. Through meditation, we can become free of our egos,
releasing our temporal attachments and concerns. Buddhism has two major branches. In
Theravada Buddhism, only monks attain this enlightenment. In contrast, in Mahayana
Buddhism, all people may become enlightened. " Similar to Hinduism, those who do not
achieve enlightenment in this life will continue the journey toward liberation after rebirth.!
6. Religions of the World Part 2
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to distinguish between several Eastern religions,
folk religions, and pagan and neo-pagan religions.
Confucianism and Taoism. Both Confucianism and Taoism were founded in China
during a time of social conflict. Seeking to bring harmony, the founders of Confucianism
and Taoism, Confucius (551-479 Bc) and Lao-Tzu (estimated
604-531 Bc), offered different but complementary approaches
to living well.! Confucianism has to do with rites, relationships,
and virtuous conduct-filial piety, loyalty, obedience, humility,
and faithfulness. Honoring ancestors is critical. Through it, a
family is ensured protection, and the deceased is granted peace in
the afterlife.
In Taoism, one must strive to live consistently with the Tao
(the natural order of the universe) -that is to say, "go with the
flow." Taoism teaches the interconnectedness of all things
through yin (things associated with earth) and yang (things
associated with heaven). One cannot exist without the other.
There are no true opposites like right or wrong, good or evil. One must seek to hold all
things in balance, accepting the universe as it is.
Shinto. Shinto is a Japanese religion strongly influenced by Confucianism, Taoism, and
Buddhism. It was an official state religion from 1868 through World War II. Because it
has few set doctrines, followers engage in various practices—-nature worship, divination,
meditation, and veneration of ancestors. Interestingly, Shinto adherents believe death is
evil and leave all funerals to Buddhist priests!®
Sikhism and Jainism. "Sikhism arose in a Hindu Culture ... that was under Muslim
domination."' This probably explains why it seems to be a blend of Hinduism and Islam.
Like Hinduism, Sikhism affirms that God is formless and beyond human understanding.
Sikhs also believe in reincarnation. With Islam, Sikhs are monotheistic, rejecting all other
deities and images in worship. Because separation from God causes suffering, the goal of
Sikhism is to be reunited with God through love.
Jainism is another popular Indian religion. It is poly theistic and holds ideas about
reincarnation similar to Hinduism. It teaches that humans are trapped in their physical
bodies and unaware of their "inherent perfection." One may achieve liberation from the
bodily prison and realization of the true self through a "correct conception of reality,
correct knowledge, and proper conduct."20
The Baha'i Faith. The Baha'i Faith is a syncretic religion, meaning that it blends the
beliefs of several religious traditions. It grew out of Islam during the ninetenth century.
It may be summarized in the words of Baha'i teacher Abdul Baha: "To be a Baha'i simply
means to love all the world; to love humanity and try to serve it; to work for universal
peace and brotherhood. According to Bahai teaching, God has manifested many times
144 | CHAPTER 9
Confucius and
Lao-tzu
CHAPTER 9 | 145


<!-- page-6 -->

throughout history through religious leaders like Abraham, Buddha, Christ, Muhammad,
and Baha'u'llah (the founder of Baha'i). Thus, each religion progressively reveals truth
about God. Emphasizing unity and harmony between religions, Baha'i followers work for
racial and gender equality, peace, and other social causes.?
Folk religions. This umbrella term refers to tribal and indigenous religions. It
encompasses Native Americans, Aboriginal Australians, African Zulus, and many more
groups from all over the planet.
Each people group, tribe, or village
community has its own distinct gods,
symbols, and rituals. Nonetheless,
there are a few unifying themes in folk
religions. First, they usually do not
have holy books. Instead, knowledge
and traditions are passed down orally.
Second, there is a great emphasis on the
ancestral homeland where a person's
identity is forged. Third, humans, the
natural world, and the unknowable
divine power are meant to exist in
harmonious cooperation, and there is a
deep connectedness among plants, animals, and humans.23
Pagan and neo-pagan religions. These religions revive ancient pre-Christian and
pre-Judaic practices and adapt them for today. They are quite diverse. Many are
polytheistic. Some rely on ancient mythologies. Others are syncretic and may include
belief in reincarnation. Most revere nature. They promote the use of magic—spells, rituals,
amulets, and incantations to seek supernatural power, induce healing, invoke protection,
or quell harmful influences. The largest neo-pagan religion is Wicca.
Pagan and neo-pagan religions often involve occult practices, esoteric philosophy, and
spiritism (communication with the dead). Scripture prohibits spiritism and involvement in
the occult (Deuteronomy 18:10-12, Acts 19:18-20, Ephesians 5:11).
7. Religions of the World Part 3
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to discriminate between common religious cults.
The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints (LDS). This cult began in 1830.
The founder, Joseph Smith, claimed that in a vision, an angel presented him with golden
tablets covered in hieroglyphs, which Smith translated and published as the Book of
Mormon. Smith taught that his message was the "culmination" of Christian truth. 2 Early
on, the LDS church practiced polygamy. It abandoned the practice in 1890 following
pressure from the US government, but some splinter groups continue the practice. Today,
They are known for their moral character, family values, and evangelistic efforts. LDS
theology differs widely from Christian theology. For example, to be saved, Latter-Day
Saints must not only have faith in Jesus but also be baptized, do good works, and follow
LDS teachings. It also teaches that Jesus and Satan are brothers and that all humans can
achieve godhood and rule their own planet in the afterlife.
Jehovah's Witnesses. Jehovah's Witnesses is a cult founded by Charles T. Russell in
1872. Russell studied the Bible, hoping to determine the date of Jesus return, which
he predicted for 1914. The end times continue to occupy a central place in Jehovah's
Witnesses' theology. Jehovah's Witnesses deny the Trinity and reject the belief that Jesus is
God. Instead, they teach that the archangel Michael became a perfect human named Jesus,
after which he died and was raised spiritually (not physically). Jehovah's Witnesses achieve
salvation through works, including distributing Watch Tower Society literature. In the
afterlife, a select 144,000 will go to a spiritual existence in heaven; the remaining faithful
will enjoy a physical, earthly paradise.
Christian Science. Founded in 1875 by Mary Baker Eddy, Christian Science initially
taught that the key to physical healing was found in Jesus' secret teachings, not in
doctors or medicine. This has been somewhat modified today, and adherents may seek
conventional medical treatment. Adherents do not believe that Jesus is God or that he rose
physically from the dead. They also hold that sin, death, and evil do not ultimately exist.
Scientology. The Church of Scientology was founded by science-fiction author L. Ron
Hubbard in 1953. It is largely about self-discovery and personal empowerment. According
to Scientology, our problem is not sin but a lack of awareness about our true spiritual
nature. Over the course of several lifetimes (through reincarnation), our minds pick up
"engrams," which cause pain, illness,
and irrational behavior? With the
help of a trained auditor, we can
learn to identify and remove them to
achieve greater spiritual awareness and
personal freedom.
SCIENTOLOGY
Eastern religious movements. This
term encompasses splinter groups
from Eastern religions. For example,
Soka Gakkai International and
Falun Dafa (Falun Gong) arose from
Buddhism; the International Society
for Krishna Consciousness (ISKCON, popularly known as the Hare Krishnas), the Self-
Realization Fellowship, and Transcendental Meditation arose from Hinduism. The New
Age movement, especially popular in the West, borrows heavily from Eastern religious
traditions, promoting ideas like karma and reincarnation, and practices like meditation
and channeling. Those influenced by the New Age movement hold a wide array of beliefs
and do not necessarily make up an organized religion. The various New Age groups may
be categorized under the worldview heading of new spirituality.
Church of
Scientology
bullding, Los
Angeles, CA, USA
CHAPTER 9 | 147
146 | CHAPTER 9


<!-- page-7 -->

Other cults. Some cults make the news due to mass suicides (for example, the Peoples
Temple, Branch Davidians, and Heaven's Gate). Others gain notoriety when their leaders
are arrested for committing crimes or facilitating physical, sexual, and other abuse. Some
are focused on UFOs; others prepare for the end of the world. New groups arise all the
time, and the process has accelerated today "due to relative ease of travel and worldwide
communication by electronic means."26 Therefore, it is impossible to list or even categorize
all the cults in the world. Scripture warns that "the time is coming when people will
not endure sound teaching, but having itching ears they will accumulate for themselves
teachers to suit their own passions and will turn away from listening to the truth and
wander off into myths" (2 Timothy 4:2-4).
8. Fruitful Interreligious Dialogue
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to explain how to dialogue with both devout and
nominal adherents of other religions.
The above summaries give only a very general overview of world religions. It is impossible
to thoroughly explain any religion in a paragraph, and there are hundreds of other minor
religions or groups that we can't touch on here. Those who interact with people of different
faiths need to investigate those faiths more thoroughly. (See Appendix B for recommended
resources on this topic.) Even so, when conversing with a religious person, we need to
be careful not to assume that we already
understand his or her religion. Ultimately,
& interreligious
dialogue:
a conversation that
seeks to foster
understanding
between people
of different
religions
what will help you most in religious
conversations is adopting a prayerful and
loving approach characterized by patience,
listening, and curiosity (Proverbs 18:13,
Philippians 4:6, James 1:19). This is essential
in any fruitful interreligious dialogue—a
conversation that seeks to foster understanding
between people of different religions.
If we ever hope to reach people of other
religions with the gospel, we must first try
to understand what they believe, why they
believe it, and what they want from their religion. Here are a couple of ideas to help you
have fruitful interreligious dialogues:
Talk to a real person. Stereotypes of religious people abound: the tree-hugging New
Ager, the gun-waving Islamic terrorist, and the clean-cut Latter-Day Saints missionary.
But real people do not often fit our stereotypes and religious categories. Some people take
their faith seriously and strive to conform to its ethical teachings; others are less strict in
their adherence and observance. Some are nominal adherents who are culturally associated
with a religion. Religious nominalism refers to the state of being culturally affiliated with a
particular religion but not actively practicing it.
In every religion, including Christianity, you will find great variety. Most religions also
have various denominations or schools of thought, sometimes leading in very different
directions. Moreover, every religion has extremists who break off from the dominant
group, fanatically emphasize particular points of doctrine, or practice their religion with
extreme zeal or even violence.
Further complicating matters, it is common to find
people whose religious beliefs are an assortment of ideas
gleaned from multiple religions. What does all this
mean? Simply this: when you are talking to a Hindu,
a Jew, a Wiccan, or even another Christian, you can't
assume you already know what they believe. If you really
want to know what someone believes, you have to ask
him or her to explain it to you.
Acknowledge truth wherever it is found. Christians
believe Christianity is true for everyone, but this does
& religious
nominalism:
the state of
being culturally
affiliated with a
particular religion
but not actively
practicing it
not mean that all other religions are entirely devoid of
truth. God's common grace is available to all people, so
anyone in any religion may discern aspects of the truth or have religious goals similar to a
Christian's (Romans 1:20). In conversation, we need to look for these connection points.
What can we agree with in this religion? What are the essential points of difference? Are
we both asking similar questions but coming up with different answers? We won't always
be able to find these connections, but it is often helpful to try.
Be charitable. In any interreligious dialogue, one of the most significant challenges is
simply trying to make sense of each other's beliefs. You may think, "That's ridiculous,"
or "How could someone believe that?" This is normal. If you find you are often shocked
or amused by what people believe, try this: record yourself trying to explain the Trinity
in a way that makes sense to a non-Christian. It is not easy! Recognize that your beliefs
will sometimes sound silly to others (1 Corinthians 1:23). So, if someone's religion
sounds unbelievable to you, give them the benefit of the doubt. Ask questions to try
and understand.
9. Case Study: A Dialogue with a Muslim
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to demonstrate how to engage in healthy
interreligious dialogue.
Since religions and their adherents are incredibly diverse, no two religious dialogues
will look alike. Each requires a unique approach. Consider how a fruitful interreligious
dialogue might play out with an American Muslim. Ahmed was born in the United States
after his parents emigrated from Indonesia. He is 16 years old. You both play on the same
recreational soccer team.
CHAPTER 9 | 149
148| CHAPTER 9
© Religion Roundup


<!-- page-8 -->

The place to begin is simply getting to know Ahmed as a person, just as you would
with anyone else, and praying that he might come to know Jesus as Lord. Spending time
together will give you a sense of Islam's role in his life. Is it more of a cultural thing, or is
it something he takes very seriously? Does he recite the Quran? Is he a regular attendee at
the local mosque? Does he fast during
Ramadan? As you get to know him,
you'll probably discover answers to
these questions naturally.
Moving into conversations more
specifically about religion, a good
opening question to ask Ahmed might
be, "What it is like to be a Muslim
in the United States?" In the past
two decades, Muslims in the United
States have often been looked on with
distrust and suspicion because of 9/11
and extremist groups like al-Qaeda, ISIS, and the Taliban. Yet, most Muslims simply want
to live in peace. Perhaps Ahmed has experienced discrimination because of his Islamic
heritage. If so, you could ask him, "What was that like?" or "How did it make you feel?"
These questions help you better understand and empathize with his experience.
You may then want to ask about his religious beliefs in greater depth. How does
he view God? The purpose of life? The way of salvation? Jesus? He may, in turn, ask
about your beliefs. In talking, you will likely discover many points of commonality. For
example, Islam teaches that there is one God who is utterly holy and the Creator of all that
exists. Christians agree (Isaiah 57:15). There is much to affirm in Islamic teachings, such
as the importance of fasting, prayer, giving, and working for justice. Of course, you will
also find points of difference. Islam rejects the Trinity. Though Muslims hold Jesus in high
regard, they do not believe that he is God or that he died on the cross. This contradicts
Christian beliefs about Jesus (Mark 15:22-37). Also, in contrast to Christian teaching, the
Islamic view of salvation is works-based.
You can discover what Ahmed really wants. What does he hope that Islam will do for
him? Why is it important to him? One possible answer Ahmed might give is that he wants
to go to paradise. At the final judgment, he hopes that his good works will outweigh his
bad ones so that he can spend eternity there. Such an answer would allow ample space
for sharing the gospel. Muslims want to be judged righteous by God, but until the final
judgment, a Muslim can never truly know where he or she stands with Allah.
What if we could tell Ahmed that he doesn't have to wonder about his standing
before God? What if there were someone who had already passed the test, someone who
was perfectly righteous and obedient to God's laws? And what if this someone made it
possible for Ahmed to be declared righteous right now? Furthermore, what if this person is
someone that Islam already holds in high regard —Jesus?
The initial focus is not trying to prove that Christianity is true and Islam is false. We
do not need to immediately convince Ahmed that Jesus is God. Instead, we simply want
to introduce Ahmed to Jesus as more than a Prophet. We want to help him see how Jesus
embodies God's love for his creation and that Jesus fulfilled the law perfectly (something
we could never do). We want to show him we do not do good deeds to earn God's love.
Instead, God's love for us redeems us, motivates us, and empowers us to do what is good.
As Ahmed learns more about Jesus, he may eventually see that this remarkable Human
was and is truly God and Savior.
A dialogue like this takes commitment, careful listening, and patience. Such an
approach doesn't guarantee results, but it does help us grow in friendship and understand-
ing, fulfilling our calling to love people and share the gospel.
10. Conclusion
Though religious belief is declining in several countries, the number of people today who
identify with a religion vastly outweighs those who don't.? Religion plays a crucial role in
helping people understand reality and their purpose in life. As globalization continues, we
will increasingly interact with people from various religions. It might be tempting to keep
quiet about our faith to avoid upsetting anyone. It seems far easier to accept the claim that
no one religion can be true for everyone.
But for Christians, this is not an option. If we believe that Jesus is the way, the truth,
and the life (John 14:6), we are called to tell others about him (Matthew 28:19-20;
2 Corinthians 5:20). The claims that all religions are true or all lead to the same place
not only ignore Jesus words but are logically impossible. Furthermore, those claims are
not respectful to believers of other faiths because because they do not take the differences
between religions seriously.
Many say that religions are nothing more than good stories. So far as they provide
inner happiness, peace, or satisfaction, they are fine. But to suggest that there is one true
religion for everyone is both troubling and offensive. However, Christianity does teach
there is only one way to God (Acts
4:12, 1 Timothy 2:5). As faithful
disciples of Christ, we can engage
what
in dialogue that acknowledges
do
you
differences and seeks
understanding. We aim to foster
conversations that might lead to
greater friendship and openness
to the gospel. Our challenge is
cultivating the skills necessary
for creating fruitful spiritual
conversations and navigating them
in a Christlike manner.
It is rarely easy to understand
how other people think and believe, especially when their religious beliefs differ from ours.
Fruitful intereligious dialogue takes prayer, effort, patience, understanding, a willingness
believe?
150 | CHAPTER 9
CHAPTER 9 | 151


<!-- page-9 -->

to listen and not jump to conclusions, and, above all, love. Yet, for many people, the
thought of even having a conversation with a religious person who might challenge their
beliefs can be intimidating. Thankfully, Christians have ample opportunity to prepare for
these conversations in their local church and community.
There are probably plenty of people within your own church who think very differently
than you about many things. And if you drive a few miles, you can easily find another
Christian church with beliefs quite different from yours. In addition to studying Scripture,
one of the best ways to prepare yourself for conversations with people of other faiths is to
talk to other Christians with whom you disagree. In doing so, you can practice asking
good questions and grow in understanding, patience, and empathy. This is no small
matter. If you cannot learn how to talk to those who share your faith, you are unlikely
to have much sympathy or understanding for those whose faith is entirely different from
your own. So, here's a place to begin: Find another Christian and discuss something you
disagree on.
In this chapter, we've explored religions and some important principles for talking to
religious people. But what about talking to people who aren't religious? We'll consider the
nonreligious in the next chapter.
ENDNOTES - 9
' Yann Martel, Life of Pi (Orlando: Harcourt, 2001), 66.
2 Martel, Life of Pi, 69.
3 Martel, Life of Pi, 317.
* John Calvin, Institutes of the Christian Religion, 2 vols., ed. John T. McNeill, trans. Ford Lewis Battles
(Philadelphia: The Westminster Press, 1960), 1:108.
' See "The Blind Men and the Elephant," Peace Corps, peacecorps.gov/educators/resources/story-blind-men-
and-elephant/.
• Douglas Groothuis, Christian Apologetics: A Comprehensive Case for Biblical Faith, 2nd ed. (Downers Grove,
IL: IVP Academic, 2022), 637.
7 John Hick, An Interpretation of Religion (New York: Oxford University Press, 1989), 350, as quoted in
Groothuis, Christian Apologetics, 638.
& Groothuis, Christian Apologetics, 638-39.
9 For a detailed evaluation of religious pluralism and a multifaceted critique of Hick's arguments, see
Groothuis, Christian Apologetics, 627-55.
10 Derek Cooper, Christianity and World Religions: An Introduction to the World's Major Faiths (Phillipsburg,
NJ: P&R Publishing, 2013), 91-95.
" Huston Smith, The World's Religions: A Completely Revised and Updated Edition of The Religions of Man
(New York: HarperCollins, 1991), accessed via Adobe Digital Editions, 222.
12 John Dickson, A Doubter's Guide to World Religions (Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2022), 37-38, 48-49,
58, 77.
13 Smith, The World's Religions, 27.
1 Dickson, 98-107.
15 Dickson, 77, 82-84.
16 Cooper, Christianity and World Religions, 71-72.
17 Cooper, Christianity and World Religions, 64-73.
18H. Wayne House, The Evangelical Dictionary of World Religions (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker, 2018), accessed
via Adobe Digital Editions, 743.
19 Smith, The World's Religions, 76.
20 House, Dictionary of World Religions, 407-408.
2 J. E. Eslemont, Baba i llah and the New Era: An Introduction to the Baha'i Faith (Wilmette, IL: Bahai
Publishing Trust, 1980, 71, as quoted in Ron Rhodes, The Challenge of the Culs and New Religions: The
Essential Guide to Their History, Their Doctrine, and Our Response (Grand Rapids, MT: Zondervan, 2001), 213.
22 Rhodes, The Challenge of the Cults, 213.
23 Smith, The World's Religions, 365-380.
24 Justo L. González, The Story of Christianity, Volume II: The Reformation to the Present Day (New York:
HarperOne, 2010), 344.
25 Rhodes, The Challenge of the Cults, 158.
26 "New Religious Movements: An Overview? Encyclopedia of Religion. Encyclopedia.com. March 20,
2023). encyclopedia.com/environment/encyclopedias-almanacs-transcriprs-and-maps/new-religious-
movements-overview.
27 "Key Findings from the Global Religious Futures Project," Pew Research Center, December 21, 2022,
pewresearch.org/religion/2022/12/21/key-findings-from-the-global-religious-futures-project/.
| CHAPTER 9
CHAPTER 9 | 153
9 Religion Roundup
