# Chapter 10

<!-- page-1 (book p.10) -->

Questioning
Religion
1. The Nones
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to categorize a people group known as the nones
into three subgroups according to their religious beliefs.
Since the early 1990s, the number of people who do not affiliate with any particular
religion has been rising rapidly. They accounted for around 20 percent of the US
population in 2014.' In 2021, another study found that the number had grown to 29
percent.? The religiously unaffiliated could make up 52 percent of the population by 2070.3
Those who do not filiate with any particular religion are collectively known as nones.
The nones include three different groups
"nothing in particular." Let's briefly consider the beliefs of each group.
-atheists, agnostics, and those who say they are
& atheism: the belief that
God or gods do not exist
Atheism. At its most basic, atheism is the
belief that God or gods do not exist.
In a country such as the United States,
where it is familiar—and in some areas
culturally expected—to have religious
beliefs, it is still relatively unpopular to
identify as an atheist. (At the time of this
writing, self-identified atheists make up
about four percent of the population.) For
this reason, atheists may hold their nonreligious convictions with greater firmness than
others. Yet, not all atheists share the same beliefs. There are at least three different types of
atheistic beliefs:
1. For many people, atheism is a type of protest against all that is wrong in the world.
Because they cannot reconcile the existence of a loving God with evil, they abandon
belief.
2. The atheism of some grows out of misinformation about God. Their primary reason
for rejecting God is that they have come to believe he is evil or imaginary.
3. Others are practical atheists. They believe that God exists, but they don't see God as
relevant to their lives.
Following the September 11, 2001, attacks and other incidents of religious violence
in the early 2000s, prominent atheists, including Sam Harris, Richard Dawkins, and
Christopher Hitchens, attacked religious beliefs as not only foolish but harmful to society
through their books and numerous lectures. While the heyday of this movement (new
atheism) seems to have passed, the objections these atheists raised against religion remain
influential in the broader culture.
Agnosticism. Agnosticism is the belief that the existence of God or gods is unknowable or
unprovable.
Agnostics account for approximately five percent of
the U.S. population. Unlike their atheist counterparts,
agnostics are undecided on the question of whether
& agnosticism: the belief that
the existence of God or gods
is unknowable or unprovable
or not God exists. Some have a broadly modernist
worldview: because science cannot prove or disprove
God's existence, they think it is better to leave the
question alone or remain open about it. Others have
a postmodern worldview: because they believe that
ultimate reality is unknowable, they don't bother with
the question of God.
CHAPTER 10 | 155
© Questioning Religion


<!-- page-2 -->

Nothing in particular. The largest group within the nones category (about 20 percent
of US adults) "describe their religion as 'nothing in particular,»' a broad label used
to describe people who do not identify as atheist or agnostic and are not affiliated with any
religious group.
For the nothing in particular group, religious belief isn't important. These people
"just don't feel strongly about religion one way or the other." They may be nominally
associated with a religion, but it is irrelevant
to their everyday concerns. They don't get
& nothing in
particular:
people who do
not identify
as atheist or
agnostic and are
not affiliated
with any
religious group
argue about it or try to convince others
that they shouldn't be religious. The
nothing in particular group encompasses
people of all ages, genders, income levels,
and educational backgrounds, and is
currently "the fastest-growing... group
in the United States" in terms of religious
affiliation?
So, why are more and more people
identifying as nones? What are their
objections to religion, and how they be
answered? Is religion all that relevant? These are the questions we'll explore in this chapter.
Along the way, we'll examine some common myths about religion, explore why it is
necessary, and learn how to talk with those who don't identify as religious.
2. Foundational Nonreligious Worldviews
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to distinguish between three nonreligious
worldviews: secularism, humanism, and individualism.
To understand the growth of the nones, we need to touch on a few worldviews that often
undergird nonreligious belief.
Secularism. Ever since the rise of modernism (discussed in Chapter 8), many people have
been skeptical of religious truth claims. Trusting in scientific achievement, technological
progress, and human potential to create a just society, some believe we should leave
religion behind and take control of our future.
We must stop worrying about eternal destinies
and focus on the here and now. Society must
be shaped regarding human interests without
reference to God or religion. This is secularism,
a worldview that advocates a public society free
from the influence of religion.
A secular society is one in which God,
religious beliefs, and religious values are pushed
to the margins of society. In such a society,
religious beliefs may be comforting in private
& secularism:
a worldview
that advocates
a public
society free
from the
influence of
religion
eli g'on
156 | CHAPTER 10
but are irrelevant in public life. Some secularists argue that religion blocks progress and is
something humans need to grow out to flourish.
Humanism. Humanism, a movement that predates secularism, arose in Europe during
the Renaissance (from 1400s to 1600s). Then, humanism referred to the study of the
humanities, such as literature,
art, history, and poetry. The early
humanists were dedicated to careful
study of ancient documents. Later,
the term humanism was used more
/ humanism:
a worldview primarily
concerned with human
dignity, potential, and
well-being
broadly to define a worldview primarily
concerned with human dignity,
potential, and well-being.
This form of humanism
encompasses a wide range of
thinkers-Christians, agnostics,
atheists, and many others. Humanists
promote justice and human dignity,
desire harmony, and work for the flourishing of people in the here and now. In the mid-
twentieth century, a new term arose with a specifically secular meaning: secular humanism.
Secular humanists share the same concerns as their humanist forebearers but are also
agnostic or atheistic. They usually believe in the essential goodness of humans and argue
that religion is a deterrent to human well-being and needs to be abandoned for society to
flourish.1°
Individualism. One of the characteristic features of Western culture is individualism,
a worldview in which individual independence and autonomy are paramount.
In an individualistic society, the individual is emphasized over the group. Self-reliance,
personal autonomy, and self-expression are fundamental values. Those who break away
from family, tradition, or societal norms are celebrated as innovators, mavericks, and free
spirits. Contrast this with more traditional, community-oriented societies where the group
is emphasized over the individual and breaking
with family or tradition is frowned upon. Both
types of societies have their pros and cons. At its
best, individualism has led to innovation, reform,
and renewal. At its worst, it has led to narcissism.
A narcissist lacks empathy and concern for
others; he or she is isolated and without healthy
relationships. A narcissist sees him-or herself
as the center of the universe and feels free to do
whatever he or she pleases, regardless of how it
affects anyone else. Narcissism often manifests
itself as indifference, obsession with superficial
& individualism:
a worldview in
which individual
independence
and autonomy
are paramount
CHAPTER 10 | 157


<!-- page-3 -->

Stephen
Hawking, April
21, 2008, NASA
50" anniversary,
Washington,
D.C., USA
things such as one's possessions or appearance, laziness, excessive pursuit of pleasure
(hedonism) or fame, and pride.
The growth of these three worldviews contributes to the growth of the nones, though
not all nones fit neatly into one of these categories. Religious people may also hold one of
these worldviews. In societies where these worldviews are influential, there will likely be
more people identifying as atheists, agnostics, and nothing in particular.
3. Religion and Reality
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to analyze two common misconceptions about
God and defend the Christian perspective.
Another factor that might be contributing to the growth of the nones is the significant
amount of misinformation about God and religion. In the following sections, we'll look
at eight common misconceptions and consider how to address them from a Christian
perspective.
Misconception #1—Religion is a fairy tale. The legendary physicist Stephen Hawking
once said, "There is no heaven or afterlife... that is a fairy story for people afraid of
the dark."'' Hawking was hardly the first to make such claims. In 1841, the philosopher
Ludwig Feuerbach argued (in essence) that "God is nothing
else but an abstraction made up of all the characteristics we
would wish for ourselves... The function of religion... is
that it is wish-fulfillment, a way to deal with frustrations one
encounters in his or her life."2 Feuerbach's ideas were taken
up by people like political theorist Karl Marx, who claimed
that religion is a human invention that provides only
"illusory happiness." Like a drug, it keeps people sedated and
in bondage.! Sigmund Freud (the founder of psychoanalysis)
argued that God was essentially created by people who felt
helpless and in need of a father figure. Today, many share
their views: religion is nothing more than a fairy tale to
comfort those who are too weak to face reality.
People who assert these views urge us to give up
supernatural fantasies and face reality. But no scientific
discovery can prove that the supernatural is not real. If you
do not believe there is anything outside of the material world, you must, of course, relegate
religious beliefs to the land of fairies. However, couldn't someone just as quickly dismiss
atheism, saying it is a fairy tale for those who do not want to admit God's existence or live
in relationship with him? Ultimately, those who make either claim must do more than
merely assert that religion or atheism is a fairy tale. They must examine the evidence to
determine which claim is valid.
Misconception #2—I don't have religious experiences, so God isn't real. Have
you ever been to a church service where everyone around you seemed to be having an
incredible experience of God? Perhaps some were swaying to the music during worship,
weeping, lifting their hands, or even speaking in tongues. As you watched all of this,
you wondered, "How come I never experience God like that?" The lack of supernatural
experiences, or accumulated religious knowledge without a feeling of closeness with God,
or unanswered prayer might lead someone to conclude God is not real.
But does a lack of personal experience mean that God
isn't real? There are at least two things to say in response.
First, the absence of an experience is insufficient to prove or
refute something. To say that God isn't real because you don't
experience him is an argument from silence (see Chapter 6). The
person who makes this claim needs to examine other evidence,
including the accounts of people who claim to experience God as
well as arguments for God that don't depend on experience. Our
experience is important, but it is not everything. There are many
things we believe despite having never experienced them. So, our
faith or lack thereof should be based on substantial evidence, not
only on personal experience.
Second, could God's presence be readily available to us, but our eyes not open wide
enough to see him? C. S. Lewis said, "We may ignore, but we can nowhere evade, the
presence of God. The world is crowded with Him. He walks everywhere incognito. And
the incognito is not always hard to penetrate. The real labour is to remember, to attend.
In fact, to come awake. Still more, to remain awake."' Paying attention to signs of God's
presence is difficult in a world where he is mostly forgotten, but we can keep our eyes open
and ask God to make himself known.
4. Religion and Reason
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to critique two misconceptions: one about
religion and science and one about religion being a form of indoctrination.
Misconception #3— Religion is unnecessary because of science. "In a few hundred
years, science has taken us farther in understanding the universe than the religion [sic]
has in 10,000."16 So says Pi Patel's father in the movie Life of Pi. His statement is a good
summary of what many people believe about religion today. Beginning with the scientific
revolution in the sixteenth century, the rate of scientific and technological development
has grown exponentially. Scientists constantly make discoveries, often leading to a better
quality of life. In light of this, some people conclude religions like Christianity look badly
out of date.
Yet, science leads to only partial knowledge (see Chapter 8). It can tell us how, but
not why. It can tell us about causes but not purposes. This misconception also fails
to acknowledge that science depends on assumptions best explained by a Christian
worldview. For example, scientists operate on the belief that the world is understandable
by the human mind. Yet, why should we trust our minds to lead us to truth? C.S. Lewis
said it like this:
C. S. Lewis, 1951,
Broadcasting
House, London,
United Kingdom
158 | CHAPTER 10
CHAPTER 10 | 159
APOLOGETICS 9


<!-- page-4 -->

Supposing there was no intelligence behind the universe, no creative mind. In that
case, nobody designed my brain for the purpose of thinking. It is merely that when the
atoms inside my skull happen, for physical or chemical reasons, to arrange themselves
in a certain way, this gives me, as a by-product, the sensation I call thought. But, if so,
how can I trust my own thinking to be true? It's like upsetting a milk jug and hoping
that the way it splashes itself will give you a map of London. But if I can't trust my own
thinking, of course I can't trust the arguments leading to atheism, and therefore have
no reason to be an atheist, or anything else. Unless I believe in God, I cannot believe in
thought: so I can never use thought to disbelieve in God.!?
Lewis argument raises interesting questions: Is our ability to think and reason better
explained by an unguided process of Darwinian evolution and natural selection or by
design? And if our brains were not designed, can we trust them to lead us to accurate
scientific conclusions or even reasonable thoughts?
Misconception #4—Religious instruction is a form of indoctrination. The word
indoctrination has a fairly neutral definition. It can refer to teaching people fundamental
doctrines or principles. Today, however, the term is frequently used in a negative sense,
referring to the practice of brainwashing or teaching
others to accept sectarian beliefs uncritically!
Indoctrination, in this second sense, is very
dangerous. Think of how members of certain extreme
cults have been brainwashed to accept the authority of
the cult leader, regardless of how bizarre or immoral
the leader's actions may be. Or think of how the Nazi
party indoctrinated German youth, leading them
to dehumanize Jewish people and turn in their own
families. For some, teaching the Bible in schools or
raising children in a particular religious tradition
seems just as dangerous. Although they admit that
religious instruction may not always lead to horrible
acts, some still worry it will produce a society filled
with mindless fools.
But nothing in Scripture suggests that we should
unquestionably accept or never question Christianity (or anything else). Scripture
encourages us to use our minds (Mark 12:30, Romans 14:5), test claims (Acts 17:11,
1 Thessalonians 5:20-22), use reason (Acts 17:17, 1 Peter 3:15), and weigh evidence
(Deuteronomy 19:15, 1 Corinthians 15). Many people have come to faith only after
carefully investigating Christianity in this way—think of St. Augustine, C. S. Lewis,
Alister McGrath, or Lee Strobel. Furthermore, the only way to learn anything is by first
trusting what others teach us. As we grow, we can and should carefully examine our
beliefs. Ultimately, we can learn and grow in our Christian faith while learning to think
critically and rationally.
5. Religion and Human Flourishing
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to refute the misconceptions that religion
interferes with our freedom, and promotes prejudice, violence, and the
subjugation of women.
Misconception #5— Religion will interfere with my freedom. Many people are
convinced that a religion like Christianity with its moral standards and commands, is
going to interfere with their freedom. Some see the cost of discipleship- including
self-sacrificial love, service, and obedience—
and decide it's not worth it. They would rather
be left to themselves. Others see religion as
a negative force in their personal life. For
example, let's say you believe God is a
self-righteous, angry, and vindictive control
freak. It this is how you view God, he will
eventually become a source of psychological
distress and feel like an unnecessary burden in
your lite. Finally, some people don't want to
be accountable to God, and they don't want
anyone telling them how to live their life.
The claim "religion will interfere with my
freedom" is actually a misconception about both freedom and religion. We sometimes
think that freedom means being able to do whatever we want. But true freedom is
about having the opportunity to live in right relationship with God and others. This
misconception assumes that we are already free before religion enslaves us. But Scripture
says we are enslaved to sin, and we need Jesus to break the chains.
If we believe that true freedom has no boundaries, that humans exist primarily to live
for themselves, that God is out to get us, or that the good life is doing whatever we please,
Christianity will undoubtedly get in our way. However, if we believe that human beings
were made for relationship with God and others, and that true freedom is the ability to
live in right relationship, things begin to look different. If we are enslaved by sin, and
God alone can free us, then his "interference" in our lives is both good and necessary.
Following Jesus often comes at great personal cost, so Jesus urged us to count the cost
before doing so (Luke 14:25-33). But he also promised that following him would lead to
rest and true life (Matthew 11:29, John 17:3).
Misconception #6—Religion promotes prejudice, violence, and the subjugation of
women. The promoters of new atheism regard religion as poisonous to society. Religion,
they claim, is one of the primary sources of prejudice, violence, and the mistreatment
of women. They often point to how these immoral practices seem to be commended in
religious books like the Bible or the Quran. Sadly, there can be no doubt that religious
people have been guilty of all these things. Think of how women have been treated in
CHAPTER 10 | 161
160 | CHAPTER 10


<!-- page-5 -->

some Islamic cultures, or look at caste discrimination in Hindu societies. Christians, too,
have had their share of issues, and at times, some have been complicit in slavery, racism,
and the subjugation of native populations. Some have even used the Bible to justify these
practices. New atheists believe that if we are to solve these problems, religion must go.
However, the question we need to ask is this: are religious people who engage in prejudice,
violence, and the subjugation of women following
the teachings of their religion or distorting
them? Let's take Christianity, for example. Does
Christianity itself teach these immoral practices? A
careful investigation of the evidence shows that this
is not the case. Christianity teaches a fundamental
equality between all human beings regardless of
race or gender (Genesis 1:27, Romans 10:12,
Galatians 3:28), and Jesus urged us to treat others
as we would like to be treated (Matthew 7:12,
Luke 6:31). Furthermore, Scripture's vision for the
new creation is one in which weapons are laid down and there is peace between all members
of creation (Isaiah 2:4, 11:6-9). To be sure, there are troubling passages in Scripture about
prejudice, violence, and the treatment of women. So, we'll consider these particular issues
more carefully in Chapter 15 of this book to gain understanding.
6. Religion and Meaning
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to point out false assumptions in the
misconception that people don't need God or religion to find meaning in life.
Misconception #7—I don't need God or religion to find meaning in life. A Google
search on the question, "What is the meaning of life?" turns up an article from Psychology
Today by Neel Burton, proclaiming,
"The meaning of life is that which we choose to give
it."' Burton, a British psychiatrist, declares that determining our purpose enables us "to
lead truly dignified and meaningful lives."2 So, if we can find meaning through things
like our hobbies, creativity, family, self-expression, and service to others, we don't need
God or religion. This sounds nice, but there is a problem. What if I decide that my life's
purpose is to gain power over others through violence and coercion?
Burton does not promote anything goes; that would bring chaos. Some purposes are
undoubtedly preferable to others. Burton offers three insights from psychiatrist Viktor
Frankl on how to find meaning in life by:
1. Experiencing reality by interacting authentically with the environment and with
others.
2. Giving something back to the world through creativity and self-expression.
3. Changing our attitude when faced with a situation or circumstance that we cannot
change."
To be sure, these are all good things, but by whose standard? On the one hand, we
are told that we are free to choose our own meanings for ourselves, but on the other, we
are given a list of ways by which we should try to find meaning in our lives. However, if
life has no inherent meaning, who is to say that someone's meaning is right or wrong??
Burton undercuts his argument by setting himself up as an authority and giving us
Frankl's list of rules for finding meaning in life. It seems we are not free to create our own
meanings after all.
Others suggest that we need to stop searching for the meaning of life and just get busy
living it. Filmmaker Woody Allen said, "What if there's no God and you only go around
once, and that's it. Well, ya know, don't you want to be part of the experience?... I should
stop ruining my life searching for answers I'm never going to get and just enjoy it while it
lasts."23 On the surface, this view seems to have great appeal. Since this is our only chance
at life, doesn't that fact alone make our lives meaningful?
This may seem to help some people, but what about those trapped in suffering, for
whom enjoying life is hardly an option? With an atheistic view, suffering is meaningless.
How can the suffering then escape despair? Frankl, a Holocaust survivor, believed that for
people to endure suffering, they need a "transcendent reference point" to give meaning to
their lives. 24 We need to know that our lives have some good and greater purpose, even
when circumstances suggest otherwise. For Christians, we have hope in suffering that God
is always at work, even in the darkest circumstances (Romans 5:3-5).
If we reject the idea that life has any inherent meaning, we face another problem.
"It could be [true] that all existence is a
pointless joke," wrote Hitchens, "but it is
not in fact possible to live ... as if this were
so."25 He also said, "A life that partakes
even a little of friendship, love, irony,
humor, parenthood, literature, and music,
and the chance to take part in battles for
the liberation of others cannot be called
What's your WHY?
meaningless. 26
We all seek some way of making our
lives meaningful. Yet Burton's, Allen's and
Hitchens explanations fail to explain why
one meaning is objectively better than other
meanings. Christians believe that since we
are created in God's image, we can find meaning even in the most mundane situations.
Yet, the meaning of life is not ultimately something we can create but something we
discover and receive from God. God's purpose is objectively good and better for us than
we could possibly imagine (see Chapter 3).
CHAPTER 10 | 163
162 | CHAPTER 10


<!-- page-6 -->

Stephen Fry,
2016, London,
United Kingdom
7. Religion and Morality
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to identify the errors in the misconception that we
don't need God or religion to be moral.
Misconception #8—I don't need God or religion to be moral. There is ample evidence
to support this claim. Nonreligious people do many good things, and being religious
doesn't automatically make you a better person. So, if you don't need God to be good,
why believe in him at all? Speaking from a secular humanist point of view, Stephen Fry
explains how people can make moral choices without reference to God:
Humanists do not look to any God for rules, but think carefully for themselves about
what might be the best way to live.... We have always to be empathetic and think
about the effect of our choices on the people, or sometimes other animals, concerned.
We have to respect the rights and wishes of those involved, trying to find the kindest
course of action or the option that will do the least harm. We have to consider
carefully the particular situation we find ourselves in and not just take any rule or
commandment for granted. ... This way of thinking about what we should do is
explicitly based on reason, experience, and empathy, and respect for others rather than
on tradition or deference for authority.?
The principles for moral decision-making Fry outlines seem apparent
to most people, but where do they come from, and who gets to decide
that they are good? Fry says that we don't need God or any religious
authority to determine what is good. Still, he lists several rules we must
follow—making himself the authority that establishes what is moral.
Fry implies that religious people do not think for themselves about
what is right and wrong, suggesting that without a sacred book to tell
them what is good, they are lost. This is, quite simply, unfair. Scripture
never tells Christians to leave our reason behind when making moral
choices. The Bible does lay down some moral rules (like the Ten
Commandments), but it also asserts that God's moral law is written
on every human heart (Romans 2:12-15). Scripture does not speak to
every specific moral issue, which is why it calls us to use wisdom in
our decision-making (see Proverbs). So, Christians can readily agree with many of Fry's
standards for making moral choices.
However, we need to ask, "Where do these standards come from?" Some have argued
that Darwinian evolution can explain these moral standards. Perhaps as people evolved,
they realized they could better survive if they learned to cooperate and treat each other
with kindness. Therefore, we should do what contributes to the survival of our species. But
even if evolution could explain why we make certain moral decisions, it cannot tell us that
we should make these moral decisions. Who gets to decide that the survival of the species
is an objectively good thing? We can affirm this, but we can't be objective about it; we are
the ones most affected by the decision. And even if all humans agreed on this and they
don t), sometimes people generally agree on morally evil things such as genocide, genital
mutilation, abortion, and more.
To say these practices are wrong, we must have an objective standard. Christians say
that God is the objective reference point who determines right and wrong. Without God,
we can still do good things, but there can be no objective truth about what people ought
to do.2® As Tim Keller puts it, "While there can be moral feelings and convictions without
God, it doesn't appear that there can be moral obligation — objective moral fact' that
exist whether you feel them or not."" So, undoubredly, people can be good and moral
without believing in God; however, there can be no objective morality if God doesn't exist
(more on this in Chapter 11).
8. Religion and Relationship
› OBJECTIVE: You will be able to explain why Christianity is both a religion and a
relationship.
Some people remain put off by religion because it makes them think of stuffy churches,
odd rituals, and a catalog of rules designed to spoil their fun. Recognizing this, some
Christians have argued that Christianity isn't a religion; it's a relationship. This is a
popular idea, but is it accurate or helpful? Let's consider.
We have already seen that God created us to be in relationship with himself,
ourselves, others, and creation. These relationships are essential to our existence and
flourishing. According to Scripture, true life is found only with God, and separation
from him leads to death, both physical and spiritual. We also need relationships with
other people. To live a self-centered life, ignoring others, is to cut ourselves off from love,
self-giving, companionship, and mutual growth. We also can't overlook animals and
other living things, nor dismiss our relational stewardship responsibility for all of God's
creation.
At the heart of Christianity is the
Incarnation of Jesus. But Jesus didn't become
human so he could check up on us, force
our obedience, or show off his divine power.
Instead, he took on the form of a servant
to demonstrate God's personal love and
commitment to his creation. Jesus "made his
home among us" (John 1:14), and then gave
his life so that an eternal relationship with God
would be possible. "And this is eternal life,
that they know you, the only true God, and
Jesus Christ whom you have sent" (John 17:3). This kind of knowing is not like knowing
information about your favorite celebrity. It is knowing God personally and walking with
him in your daily life. When Jesus left Earth, he sent the Holy Spirit to indwell believers
so they could experience God's personal and relational presence in a very tangible way.
CHAPTER 10 | 165
164 | CHAPTER 10
S Questioning Religion


<!-- page-7 -->

However, it is still not quite right to say that "Christianity is a relationship, not a
religion." A religion is a specific system of belief, worship, or conduct that prescribes
particular responses to the sacred, divine, or supernatural. Does Christianity fit this
definition? Absolutely. Our faith teaches us beliefs about God, other supernatural beings,
humans, creation, salvation, judgment, the afterlife, and more. It says that these beliefs
should affect how we live and shows us how to properly worship the one true God.
Christianity isn't just about you and Jesus. As Summit Ministries President Jeff Myers
says, "Christianity is a religion that
intentionally speaks to the life of the
world. Not only is it a form of worship
and a set of moral guidelines; it is
also a worldview—a view of the world
and for the world."30 Ironically, to say
that Christianity is only a relationship
might make it less relational. That
view emphasizes one's individual
relationship with God at the expense
of relationships with others and
creation. The gospel is about God redeeming and restoring all things, not just saving
individual souls. Through Jesus, God reconciles all things to himself (Colossians 1:19-20).
Like other religions, Christianity has rules, rituals, and doctrines. Christianity,
however, is unique in that it sets all of these things in a relational context. We obey God's
commands out of love, not in an attempt to earn salvation. We engage in rituals like
baptism to demonstrate our allegiance to Jesus, not out of fear of upsetting an unknown
superpower. We hold to certain doctrines because we want to truly know God, not
because we think we must figure it all out to be saved.
Without relationship, Christianity becomes a set of rules obeyed to try and earn God's
favor. Without the religious element, Christianity becomes a personal self-help project, in
danger of ignoring God's saving work in all creation. We need both. Rather than saying,
"Christianity is a relationship, not a religion," we affirm, "Christianity is a religion, at the
heart of which is relationship."
9. True Religion and Right Worship
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to specify the difference between idolatry and
true godly worship.
Now that we've addressed some objections and misconceptions about religion and seen
the uniquely relational element of the Christian faith, let's consider what right worship
looks like from a Christian perspective.
According to Scripture, we were created to worship God. In Genesis 2:15, God placed
Adam in the Garden of Eden to "work and keep it." The Hebrew word for work (abad)
means to serve. It is the same word used for worship. This means that there is an inherent
connection between work and worship. One way that Adam and Eve were designed to
worship God was through wise stewardship of creation. We also worship God by faithfully
bearing God's image in the world. This is our fundamental calling.
Scripture regularly summons people to worship the one true God (Psalm 95:6, Isaiah
25:1, John 4:23). Worship is the essence of the Christian religion and can take many forms.
Singing and lifting praises to God is one. Another is living our lives so that God's power
and goodness are made known to the world (Romans 12:1-2). True religion, James says,
is "to visit orphans and widows in their affliction, and to keep oneself unstained from the
world" (James 1:27). When we worship God in these ways, we are declaring his true worth,
ascribing to him the glory and honor of which he alone is worthy. In worship, we also
become most truly the people God created us to be, able to live in freedom and joy.
Scripture teaches us that outside of Christ, we are not free. Though humans were
meant to live in freedom, we have become slaves to sin (Romans 6:16-17), subject to our
evil inclinations (James 1:14): "sexual immorality, impurity, sensuality, idolatry, sorcery,
enmity, strife, jealousy, fits of anger, rivalries, dissensions, divisions, envy, drunkenness,
orgies, and things like these" (Galatians 5:19-21). Sin is a brutal and merciless master,
and these "works of the flesh" can destroy us if left unchecked. Only Christ can break our
chains (Ephesians 2:1-9).
People who disaffiliate from religion or reject God's
existence do not thereby jettison worship. Instead, they
merely transfer their worship to someone or something else.
In Scripture, the act of worshipping or valuing someone or
something above God is called idolatry.
For most people, idolatry probably won't look like bowing
down before statues of wood or stone. Instead, people
are inclined to worship things like knowledge, pleasure,
s idolatry:
the act of
worshipping
or valuing
someone or
something
above God
money, accomplishments, power, fame, sex, food, another
person, or themselves. God repeatedly warns his people
against idolatry—most famously in the first two of the
Ten Commandments (Exodus 20:3-6). God alone is to
be worshipped; we are to worship him as he truly is. This means we are prohibited from
creating our own version of God according to our individual feelings, preferences, or
desires.
It's important to know that God doesn't need our worship to feel good about himself,
so he doesn't condemn idolatry because he has a big ego. Instead, God knows that we
will become like whatever we worship (Psalm 135:15-18) and that our idolatry has the
potential to destroy us as well as others (Jonah 2:8). Myers says, "If we worship things
rather than the Creator, we end up becoming like things: we can't see or hear or think
about what is true, and we begin seeing others as objects to be used for our benefit rather
than as image-bearers of God.*3l
Idolatry is undoubtedly prevalent, yet it can never satisfy for long. In the end, every
idol will fail us. To find liberation, we must look outside of ourselves. The need to
worship something beyond ourselves is one reason why religion persists despite numerous
CHAPTER 10 | 167
| CHAPTER 10


<!-- page-8 -->

predictions that it will disappear. Humans are inescapably worshipful. Regardless of what
box we check on the religion survey, we will worship someone or something. Who or what
will it be?
10. Conclusion
This chapter has shown several forms of unbelief—atheism, agnosticism, and nothing in
particular. We've considered some worldviews that often support unbelief and examined
several misconceptions many people have about religion. We then argued that Christianity
is a religion, at the heart of which is a relationship with Jesus. Finally, we highlighted the
importance of right worship and said that worshipping Jesus leads to freedom. All this
leads us to the conclusion that religion is, indeed, relevant. As we bring this chapter to a
close, let's briefly consider how Jesus is relevant for today.
Jesus shows us what God is really like. Real and painful experiences may cause people
to believe that God is distant, uninterested, untrustworthy, or cruel. Yet, Jesus turns all
our ideas about God upside down. "No one has ever seen God," says John. But Jesus,
"the only God, who is at the Father's side, has made him known" (John 1:18). And what
exactly has Jesus made known about God? First, he shows us that God is not distant and
uninterested in human life on Earth. Rather, God is so interested that he became one
of us, experiencing the pains and the joys of being human. Second, Jesus shows us that
God is trustworthy. He does not abandon his creation, no matter how corrupt it becomes.
Finally, Jesus reveals that God is not cruel
and vindictive. At any point during his
earthly ministry, Jesus might have called
down an army to crush the opposition
(Matthew 26:53). Instead, he laid down
his own life for our salvation.
Jesus helps us become who we were
created to be. As we have already seen,
Jesus turns all
our ideas about
rod upside down.
many believe that becoming a Christian
will mean the loss of freedom or the
suppression of their personality. Jesus
shows us that the truth is precisely the
opposite. Following Jesus will be costly,
but when we give our lives to him, we
receive forgiveness, salvation, grace, and the restoration of our true selves. We are made
new in Christ and delivered from the domain of darkness and transferred to Jesus'
kingdom (Colossians 1:13). In him, we become the people we were created to be.
Jesus transforms our relationships with other people and creation. When we follow
Jesus, we begin to see other people as fellow image-bearers to be loved. We find joy in
giving ourselves for others. In Jesus, broken relationships may find healing, and new
relationships can form. Our relationship with the natural world can also be transformed.
We begin to see how God is revealing his goodness in all things, and we take up our
stewardship responsibility with renewed energy. As we patiently await Jesus' second
coming, we anticipare that restoration through acts of loving service.
In the end, it is Jesus who will make the most significant difference for any
nonreligious person. Our role is to help people become open to that ransforming
encounter. We do this by sharing the gospel and living our lives in such a way that people
are attracted to Jesus. We also do it by answering objections they may have to the faith.
This work of apologetics can help clear roadblocks that prevent people from trusting Jesus.
In this chapter, we have looked briefly at how to respond to several objections. In the
following six chapters, we'll dive deeper into specific issues that can trip people up. We'll
begin with the existence of God, supernatural beings, and miracles.
ENDNOTES - 10
' Ryan P. Burge, The Nones: Where They Came From, Who They Are, and Where They Are Going (Minneapolis:
Fortress Press, 2021), 2, Kindle.
2 Gregory A. Smith, "About Three-in-Ten U.S. Adults Are Now Religiously Unaffiliated," Pew Research
Center, December 14, 2021, pewresearch. org/religion/2021/12/14/about-three-in-ten-u-s-adults-are-now-
religiously-unaffiliated/.
3 "Modeling the Future of Religion in America, Pew Research Center, September 13, 2022, pewresearch.org/
religion/2022/09/13/modeling-the-future-of-religion-in-america/.
4 Smith, "Religiously Unaffiliated."
5 The three types of atheism listed here were modified from Eugene H. Peterson, Where Your Treasure Is:
Psalms that Summon You from Self to Community (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 1993), 113-17.
Smith, "Religiously Unaffiliated."
1 Smith, "Religiously Unaffiliated."
& Burge, The Nones, 100.
' Burge, The Nones, 101.
10 For a concise history of humanism, see Angus Ritchie and Nick Spencer, The Case for Christian Humanism:
Why Christians Should Believe in Humanism, and Humanists in Christianity (London: Theos, 2014), 14-31.
" Ian Sample, "Interview: Stephen Hawking: "There Is No Heaven; It's a Fairy Story'," The Guardian, May
15, 2011, theguardian.com/science/2011/may/15/stephen-hawking-interview-there-is-no-heaven.
12 Wesley Wildman, ed., "Ludwig Feuerbach (1804-1872)," Boston Collaborative Encyclopedia of Western
Theology, accessed May 8, 2023, people.bu.edu/wwildman/bce/feuerbach.htm.
13 Karl Marx, "Contribution to the Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right. Introduction," in Karl Marx and
Friedrich Engels, On Religion (Mineola, NY: Dover Publications, 2008), 41-43.
14 Sigmund Freud, The Future of an Illusion, trans. and ed. by James Strachey (New York: W. W. Norton &
Company, 1961), 22-24.
15 C. S. Lewis, Letters to Malcolm: Chiefly on Prayer (New York: Mariner Books, 1964), 75.
16 "Life of Pi," Public Broadasting Service, November 16, 2012, pbs.org/wnet/religionandethics/2012/1/16/
november-16-2012-life-of-pi/13854/#lifeofpi_excerpt.
1 C. S. Lewis, The Case for Christianity (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1996), 32.
18 Merriam Webster, s.v. "indoctrinate" (v.), merriam-webster.com/dicrionary/indoctrinate.
1 Neel Burton M.D., "What Is the Meaning of Life?," Psychology Today, March 3, 2018, psychologytoday.
com/us/blog/hide-and-seek/201803/what-is-the-meaning-life.
20 Burton, "Meaning of Life?"
21 Burton, "Meaning of Life?"
22 Timothy Keller, Making Sense of God: An Invitation to the Skeptical (New York: Viking, 2016), 71.
23 Hannah and Her Sisters, directed by Woody Allen (1986; Los Angeles, CA: Orion Pictures).
CHAPTER 10 | 169
| CHAPTER 10


<!-- page-9 (book p.171) -->

2* Keller, Making Sense of God, 73.
25 "Christopher Hitchens on the Meaning of Life," Excellence Reporter, December 25, 2019,
excellencereporter.com/2019/12/25/christopher-hitchens-on-the-meaning-of-lifel.
26 "Christopher Hitchens on the Meaning of Life."
27 "What Makes Something Right or Wrong?" written by Andrew Copson, narrated by Stephen Fry,
Humanists UK, November 2, 2021, video, humanists.uk/thatshumanism/.
28 "The Moral Argument," Reasonable Faith with William Lane Craig, reasonablefaith.org/moral.
2 Keller, Making Sense of God, 178.
30 Jeff Myers, Unquestioned Answers: Rethinking Ten Christian Cliches to Rediscover Biblical Truths (Colorado
Springs: David C. Cook, 2020), 120.
3' Jeff Myers, Understanding the Faith: A Survey of Christian Apologetics (Colorado Springs: David C. Cook,
2016), 199-200.
ENDNOTES - 11
The Supernatural
and Truth
1. Supernatural Encounters
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to contrast Judeo-Christian beliefs about the
existence of the supernatural with materialism and naturalism.
For much of recorded history, people believed our world was immersed in the
supernatural. Ancient cultures saw gods or supernatural forces in everything— water,
fire, wind, and earth. Jews and Christians departed from the pantheistic or polytheistic
ideas of their neighbors and affirmed that the world was the creation of a personal and
infinite God. The biblical account shows us a God who is separate from and active within
170 | CHAPTER 10
