# Chapter 11

<!-- page-1 (book p.171) -->

2* Keller, Making Sense of God, 73.
25 "Christopher Hitchens on the Meaning of Life," Excellence Reporter, December 25, 2019,
excellencereporter.com/2019/12/25/christopher-hitchens-on-the-meaning-of-lifel.
26 "Christopher Hitchens on the Meaning of Life."
27 "What Makes Something Right or Wrong?" written by Andrew Copson, narrated by Stephen Fry,
Humanists UK, November 2, 2021, video, humanists.uk/thatshumanism/.
28 "The Moral Argument," Reasonable Faith with William Lane Craig, reasonablefaith.org/moral.
2 Keller, Making Sense of God, 178.
30 Jeff Myers, Unquestioned Answers: Rethinking Ten Christian Cliches to Rediscover Biblical Truths (Colorado
Springs: David C. Cook, 2020), 120.
3' Jeff Myers, Understanding the Faith: A Survey of Christian Apologetics (Colorado Springs: David C. Cook,
2016), 199-200.
ENDNOTES - 11
The Supernatural
and Truth
1. Supernatural Encounters
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to contrast Judeo-Christian beliefs about the
existence of the supernatural with materialism and naturalism.
For much of recorded history, people believed our world was immersed in the
supernatural. Ancient cultures saw gods or supernatural forces in everything— water,
fire, wind, and earth. Jews and Christians departed from the pantheistic or polytheistic
ideas of their neighbors and affirmed that the world was the creation of a personal and
infinite God. The biblical account shows us a God who is separate from and active within
170 | CHAPTER 10


<!-- page-2 -->

his creation. He is both the Creator (Genesis 1-2) and the
Sustainer, holding all things together and reconciling all
things to himself (Colossians 1:17-20).!
The Judeo-Christian worldview also affirms the existence
of other supernatural beings (like angels and demons) and
supernatural events (like miracles or exorcisms). Time and
again in Scripture, people are confronted with experiences
for which there is no natural explanation. Here are just a few
• In Exodus 3, God speaks to Moses through a bush that
is on fire but doesn't burn up.
• In 2 Kings 6, Elisha prays that God would open the eyes of one of his servants so
that he might see the angel army God has sent to rescue them.
• Psalm 106:37 says God's people rebelled against him and "sacrificed their sons and
their daughters to the demons."
• Luke 1 describes the annunciation, when the angel Gabriel declared to Mary,
a virgin, that she would give birth to God's Son, Jesus.
• In Mark 5, Jesus casts a legion of demons out of a man and sends them into a herd of
• Three days after his death, Jesus rose from the dead, showing his power over sin and
death (Matthew 28:6, Mark 16:6, Luke 24:5-7, John 20:8-9).
• In Acts 2, the disciples are supernaturally filled with the Holy Spirit, after which they
speak in tongues.
• Acts also records that after Pentecost, the apostles performed many supernatural
healings and other miracles.
• Ephesians 6:10-18 says Christians are engaged in a spiritual battle against
supernatural forces, and Hebrews 1:14 acknowledges the presence of angels as
"ministering spirits."
• Christians anticipate Satan will be finally defeated and Jesus will return to Earth in
victory (Revelation 19-20).
& materialism?
the belief that
hysical matter
is the only reality
and that all
occurrences or
processes are the
result of matter
Many Christians take these stories at face value,
but others are skeptical of anything supernatural.
Stories about gods, angels, demons, or miracles
may be dismissed as wishful thinking from a
bygone age. Given the influence of secularism in
Western culture, such skepticism is understandable.
Often at the heart of this skepticism is the doctrine
of materialism, the belief that physical matter is the
only reality and that all occurrences and processes are
the result of matter.
If the material world is all that exists, of course, there can be no supernatural beings or
events. And ultimately, everything extraordinary or unusual must be explained in terms
of natural causes. Naturalism is the belief that all phenomena can be explained in terms of
natural causes.
Yet, despite these secular assumptions, belief in
the supernatural persists even among those who
aren't religious. Every day, people worldwide have
experiences (surprising encounters, inexplicable
healings, transcendent moments of peace and joy, and
& naturalism:
the belief that all phenomena
can be explained in terms of
natural causes
more that they simply can't explain without recourse
to the supernatural. Is it reasonable to believe in the
supernatural, or can everything really be understood
in terms of natural causes? In this chapter, we'll
look at compelling evidence for the existence of
supernatural beings and miraculous events.
2. Existence of God: Kalam Cosmological
Argument
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to examine the Kalam cosmological argument to
defend God's existence.
"In the beginning, God ...." (Genesis 1:1). The Bible's very first line makes a huge
claim-God exists. Notice that Scripture does not argue for God's existence; it assumes
it. The rest of the Bible rests on this assumption. That said, apart from Scripture, there are
many good reasons to think God exists. In the following few sections, we'll look at three
of the most persuasive arguments for God's existence.
The first argument we'll consider is called the cosmological argument. Apologist William
Lane Craig summarizes the argument this way: "The cosmological argument assumes that
something exists and argues from the existence of that thing to the existence of a First
Cause or a Sufficient Reason of the cosmos." The most famous version of the argument
is called the Kalam cosmological argument. From the work of John Philoponus, a sixth-
century Christian theologian in Alexandria, Islamic philosophers developed the Kalam
argument further in the twelfth century.
Craig states the argument with a simple syllogism:
Premise 1: Whatever begins to exist has a cause.
Premise 2: The universe began to exist.
Conclusion: Therefore, the universe has a cause?
Consider the first premise: "Whatever begins to exist has a cause." The key word here
is begins. Because God has no beginning, this statement does not apply to God. Only
things that begin to exist need a cause. If you think about it, this makes good logical
sense. Things do not pop into existence out of thin air. "If they did, we wouldn't be able to
conduct successful scientific experiments," writes Summit Ministries president Jeff Myers,
172 | CHAPTER 11
CHAPTER 11 | 173
S The Supernatural and Truth


<!-- page-3 -->

"because we would never know whether our experiment or some random factor caused
the effects we observe." Furthermore, something cannot cause itself to exist. For that to
happen, says Myers, "it would have to exist before it existed!
The second premise, "The universe began to exist," is less obvious. For much of
recorded history, many philosophers and scientists believed that the universe was eternal,
without any beginning or cause. However, beginning in the twentieth century, science
started pointing in a different direction. Albert Einstein's general theory of relativity, later
corrected by mathematician Alexander Friedmann, predicted that the universe was not
static but expanding. If this was true, there had to be a point in time when it began to
expand (as in the below image).
The Universe
Begins
The Universe Expands
God in the
Heavens,
illustration, Le
Livre du Ciel et
du Monde, 1377
The idea of an expanding universe was later confirmed by Hubble's law, which says
that galaxies are moving away from Earth and that the farther away a galaxy is, the faster
it is moving.
Further supporting the idea that the universe has a cause, the second law of
thermodynamics says that the universe is slowly running out of usable energy. If the universe
were eternal, it should have run out of usable energy long
ago. Therefore, it is not eternal. It began to exist.
In addition to these scientific findings, philosophy
demonstrates that the universe has a beginning. As one
author puts it, "Past time cannot be infinite because
an infinite amount of time cannot already have been
exhausted so as to arrive at the present." What does this
mean? Let's say you are counting down from 100. You have
a definite beginning at which to start (the number 100),
and a definite place to end (the number 0). But suppose
you are trying to count down from infinity. What number
would you use to begin? There would always be at least
one more number beyond the number you wished to start
at. Thus, you would never be able to arrive at the number
zero. It is the same with the universe. If the universe were infinite, we would never be able
to arrive at the present moment. But since we are living in the present moment, there must
have been a definite point in the past when the universe began to exist?
So, the argument's premises are sound, which means that it is reasonable to conclude
that the universe has a cause. But what kind of cause? According to Craig, the universe's
cause must be "beyond the space-time universe. It must be spaceless, timeless, immaterial,
uncaused, and unimaginably powerful. All of these descriptors apply to God, which is
why Christians believe that the cosmological argument points to God's existence. "But
what,? you might ask, "caused God?" For monotheists, God is eternal and uncaused. He
perfectly suited to be the cause of the universe.
did not begin to exist; he has always existed. Therefore, he does not need a cause, and he is
3. Existence of God: Design Argument
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to employ the design argument to defend God's
existence.
When we take the time to look around, we see a world rich in complexity. A single tiny cell
contains complexity that defies the imagination. The human body is a mosaic of intricate
systems, all working together to help us survive and thrive. The laws of nature seem to
operate in a relatively predictable and orderly design. How might all this be explained? The
design argument says that the existence of an intelligent
designer best explains the appearance of design in the
universe. It can be stated as follows:
Premise 1: Design requires a designer.
Premise 2: The universe exhibits design.
Conclusion: Therefore, the universe was designed
by an intelligent designer.
Let's consider the first premise: "Design requires a
designer." This premise is well-supported by everyday
experience. Apologist Peter Kreeft writes,
Suppose you came upon a deserted island and found
"S.O.S." written in the sand on the beach. You would
not think the wind or the waves had written it by mere
chance but that someone had been there, someone
S.0.5.
intelligent enough to design and write the message?
Of course, it is possible that "S.O.S." may have been
written by chance, but it seems more natural to infer that
someone wrote it intentionally. As Kreeft says, "You immediately infer a designer when you
see design."o
What about the second premise? Does the universe exhibit design? Let's look at two
pieces of evidence.
Fine-tuning. Our planet is finely tuned for life. We can see evidence for this in these four
fundamental constants:
1. Gravitational Force-if this force is too weak, "planets and stars cannot form; too
strong, and stars burn up too quickly."
2. Electromagnetic Force— if this force "were much stronger or weaker, we wouldn't
have stable chemical bonds."
CHAPTER 11 | 175
174 | CHAPTER 11
© The Supernatural and Truth


<!-- page-4 -->

3. Strong Nuclear Force—if this force were weaker, some chemical elements essential to
life would be missing.
4. Weak Nuclear Force—if this force were stronger or weaker, "life-essential stars could
not form."!I
These forces are so delicately balanced that even the slightest change would make
life on Earth impossible. Consider, for example, the ratio of electromagnetic force to
gravitational force. According to astrophysicist Hugh Ross, this ratio "must be delicately
balanced to one part in 104° (that's one part in 10,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,
000,000,000,000,000). If the ratio varied even slightly," our universe would not be able
to sustain life!' The possibility that fine-tuning just happened by chance seems most
unlikely. And given that these
constants did not have to be the
way they are, it looks as though
an intelligent designer has
specifically designed the universe
to support life.
Biological information. The
biological information in DNA
also points in the direction of
design. Geneticist Francis Collins
says that DNA is the "universal
language of all living things."
The total amount of DNA in
any given organism makes up its genome, which is expressed in "the number of base
pairs it contains." Collins explains that the simplest bacteria have "a few million base
pairs," while the human genome "stacks up as 3.1 billion rungs of the DNA ladder."|3
This is an incredible amount of information, but where does it come from? Given the
highly complex structure of information contained in DNA, it is most reasonable to infer
intelligent design.
These two lines of evidence (others could be listed) show that the universe does exhibit
design. Therefore, it is reasonable to believe the universe was designed by an intelligent
designer. Christians say this designer is God. Of course, scientists have proposed other
alternatives to explain the apparent design of the universe. The multiverse theory suggests
that if there were an infinite number of universes, the possibility of one universe appearing
to be designed for life is much more likely. At present, the multiverse is only a guess;
it's not based on the available evidence. Even if it were true, whatever is generating the
universes would also need an explanation for its existence and fine-tuning." It seems
unreasonable to create a complicated explanation when a simpler answer with more
evidence is available.
4. Existence of God: Moral Argument
» OBJECTIVE: You will be able to apply the moral argument to defend God's
existence.
In The Abolition of Man, C. S. Lewis showed how moral values and duties seen to be
consistent across cultures, including goodwill toward others, justice, honesty, honoring
parents, and more. Of course, each culture has its own views about how these values
should be expressed, but nearly all cultures adhere to them in some form. Lewis argued
that this phenomenon could be explained by the existence of natural law, a system of
moral conduct derived from the natural order of creation and known to all humans.
There are, in other words, certain moral principles that everyone knows without having
to be told. For example, everyone seems to know that murder, theft, and dishonesty are
wrong. The question is, where did this natural law come from?
Some people believe our innate sense of morality can be explained by Darwinian
evolution. An evolutionary account of morality might look like this: As humans evolved,
they learned that to survive and thrive, it was better to cooperate, deal honestly, and
refrain from murdering each other. So,
we refrain from murder, not only because
murder is wrong, but because it is more
advantageous for society if we do not
murder. If a situation arose in which
murdering a neighbor or a particular group
of people could be considered better for
our survival, evolution cannot provide a
moral principle prohibiting this. Evolution
also cannot adequately explain why some
people risk their own survival for others'
6 natural law:
a system of
moral conduct
derived from
the natural
order of
creation and
known to all
humans
sake. Therefore, evolution is insufficient for
explaining morality. Even if it can describe
why we are moral, it cannot prescribe how
we ought to behave.
Christians believe that the existence of natural law is best explained by God. The moral
argument for God can be stated like this:
Premise 1: If God does not exist, objective moral values and duties do not exist.
Premise 2: Objective moral values and duties do exist.
Conclusion: Therefore, God exists!
Consider premise one: If God does not exist, objective moral values and duties do not
exist. An objective moral value is a statement about what is right and wrong that applies
to everyone. To determine right from wrong, we must have an objective reference point.
Consider this illustration: let's say you are sitting in your house looking out at a car in
CHAPTER 11 | 177
176 | CHAPTER 11


<!-- page-5 -->

the street. To tell if the car is moving, you need to fix your eyes on a stationary reference
point like a tree. Without this reference point, you could guess, but you would not be able
to tell if the car is moving or stationary. It is the same with morality. If we do not have an
objective reference point for morality like God, what is right and wrong is ultimately up to
each individual's subjective interpretation. A world without an objective reference point for
morality, "would be a world in which nothing... is considered evil or good [or] worthy
of praise or blame. It would be a world in which justice and fairness are meaningless
concepts, in which there would be no
accountability, no possibility of moral
improvement, no moral discourse." 17
Most of us recoil at the description
of such a world because we hold to the
second premise that objective moral
values and duties do exist. Our everyday
experience teaches us this. Whenever
we say that something is wrong, unfair,
dishonest, rude, or unkind, we are not
just saying we don't happen to like
dishonesty, rudeness, or whatever. We are appealing to a standard of morality that we
expect other people to know and adhere to.!® In other words, we are saying that objective
morality exists.
Again, we are faced with the question, where did this natural law or standard of
morality come from? If the first two premises of the moral argument are true, there must
be a moral lawgiver who is objectively good, unbiased, and incapable of human error.
Once again, God seems to be the most reasonable explanation.
5. Existence of the Christian God
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to correlate the Bible's portrayal of God to the
cosmological, design, and moral arguments for God.
The Kalam cosmological argument, the design argument, and the moral argument
together form a powerful case for the existence of God as Creator, Designer, and Lawgiver.
However, these arguments don't tell us everything we need to know about God, so we
then turn to special revelation. What does Scripture reveal about God, and does it make
sense in light of the arguments we have considered so far? Let's consider.
Christians look to general revelation to show us fundamental truths about God. We
also rely on Scripture as special revelation. This is not, as some people imagine, a blind
leap of faith. On the contrary, there is good reason to think that what the Bible tells
us about God is true. In Chapter 2, we saw that the Bible is historically reliable, that
hundreds of biblical prophecies have been fulfilled, and that the Bible has transformed the
lives of millions of people. It rings true to our experience in the world and shows us the
truth about ourselves. If the Bible is reliable in these details, then it is reasonable to trust
what it tells us about God.
We can compare Scripture's account of God to the three arguments for God. The
Kalam cosmological argument demonstrates that the universe has a cause and that
everything came into being at a specific point in time. This notion is harmonious with
the Bible's doctrine of creation, in which God is the cause of the universe, speaking
matter into existence ex nibilo (out of nothing). The Bible also affirms that God exists
apart from time (1 Timothy 1:17, 2 Peter 3:8) and space (Psalm 33:6, Acts 17:24-25). He
is immaterial (John 1:18, 4:24), the cause of everything (John 1:3, Revelation 4:11), and
unimaginably powerful (1 Chronicles 29:11, Ephesians 1:19-21). Since God is eternally
existing (Habakkuk 1:12, Revelation 1:8), we can infer that he is uncaused.
The design argument is also compatible with Scripture. Genesis 1-2 shows God
creating in an intricate and orderly fashion. God is an intelligent Designer whose
understanding and wisdom are infinite Job 12:13, Psalm 147:5). Scripture also reveals
that God is personal. We are "God's handiwork" (Ephesians 2:10, NTV), "Fearfully and
wonderfully made" (Psalm 139:14), and "in his own image" (Genesis 1:27).
Turning to the moral argument, we see that the God of Scripture is a God of steadfast
love and compassion (Deuteronomy 7:9, James 5:11). Because he is perfectly good, he alone
can be the objective reference point for right and wrong. He placed an understanding of
right and wrong within each person's heart (Romans 2:14-15), and made his standards
known through his commandments. Morality is derived from God's character. This is
why Scripture so often challenges us
to imitate God (Leviticus 11:44,
Matthew 5:48, Ephesians 5:1).
God has made himself known in
many ways—most clearly, in Jesus
(John 1:1-18, Colossians 1:15-17,
Hebrews 1:3). He came to share in all
the joys, challenges, and temptations
that come with being human, and to
live a sinless life, showing us what we
were made for. Jesus demonstrated his
divine nature, power, and authority by
forgiving sins, performing miracles,
and conquering death. In the miracle of the resurrection, Jesus offers us startling proof of
the existence of the Christian God. Today, God continues to reveal himself through the
Holy Spirit, who guides and enables us to become more like Christ.
To sum up, we believe there is good evidence for the existence of the Christian
God. First, Scripture has proven to be a trustworthy and reliable source. Second, its
account of God fits well with our picture of God from the cosmological, design, and
moral arguments. Finally, Jesus' extraordinary claims to be God are confirmed by his
miraculous resurrection (John 10:30).
CHAPTER 11 | 179
178 | CHAPTER 11


<!-- page-6 -->

6. The Possibility of Miracles
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to critique Hume's view of miracles from a
Christian perspective.
While many people find arguments and evidence for God convincing, they get tripped up
by biblical accounts of miraculous events. They may hold to a form of deism, the belief that
God created the world but is not active within it.
& deism:
the belief that
God created
the world but
is not active
within it
Thomas Jefferson, the third president of
the United States, is often referred to as a
deist. He believed in God and held Jesus in
high regard, but he thought that Jesus' ethical
teaching had been obscured by religious
superstition. To make Jesus more appealing
to his contemporaries, Jefferson edited his
Gone out...
version of the Gospels, removing all references
to miracles and Jesus' deity. Like Jefferson,
many people don't buy the Bible's accounts
of miracles. Are they right? Are miracles
impossible?
Eighteenth-century Scottish philosopher
David Hume was skeptical. Holding to a largely naturalistic view of the universe,
Hume defined a miracle as "a violation of the laws of nature."2° According to Hume,
our experience shows us that the laws of nature are uniform and unalterable, yet he felt
miracles are not necessarily impossible. But even if there is evidence for a specific miracle,
Hume asserted that we are not justified in believing it to be a miracle because it is more
probable that there is a natural explanation.?
Hume's argument, however, doesn't hold up well under scrutiny. Firstly, Hume's
definition of a miracle is prejudiced against miracles and depends on his view that the laws
of nature are unalterable. Christian philosopher Doug Groothuis stated, "A law of nature
describes the normal pattern of events in the universe, which can be described in terms
of physics, chemistry, and biology." God has designed the world to
operate according to these natural laws, yet because the world is
fallen, he sometimes intervenes in miraculous ways. From a biblical
point of view, a miracle is an extraordinary supernatural sign that
transcends the laws of nature and points to the present reality of God's
kingdom.?
In Scripture, miracles point us to God's goodness, power, and
desire to restore all creation. Pastor Tim Keller put it like this: "We
modern people think of miracles as the suspension of the natural
order, but Jesus meant them to be the restoration of the natural
order."23 Thus, miracles are not a violation of the world's design
as Hume suggested, but a foreshadowing of the restoration of all
things. They communicate God's active involvement in his world.
David Hume, by Allan
Ramsay, 1766, National
Galleries of Scotland
The second problem with Hume's argument is that we cannot know that the laws
of nature are uniform and unalterable unless we know that all reports of miracles are
false. Miracles may be improbable, but that doesn't mean they don't happen. Before we
evidence for it.
can decide if any given miracle has actually occurred, we need to carefully consider the
Craig Keener, a biblical scholar once skeptical of miracles, carefully examined the
evidence for thousands of miracles from the New Testament and the modern day. His
research led him to the conclusion that miracles have indeed occurred and are still possible
today?* Another former skeptic, Lee Strobel, interviewed several scholars about miracles
and found startling evidence for their plausibility? Miracles, it seems, could be more
common than we might assume.
How can anyone determine that a miracle happened? Philosopher J. P. Moreland lists
two criteria:
1. The event was a very unlikely one; it had a small probability of happening.
2. The event is capable of independent characterization. In other words, it can be
identified as a special occurrence besides the simple fact that it did, in fact, happen.26
Suppose you pray for your friend to recover
from a cold, and within days, your friend
recovers. Is this a miracle? If we apply these
two criteria, we find that recovering from a
cold is highly probable for most people, and it
isn't a unique occurrence. So, while this could
be an answer to your prayers, it is likely not
a miracle. But suppose you are praying for
the healing of a friend who has an incurable
disease, and then your friend is inexplicably
healed. Since this event is highly improbable
and independently special, it would be
& miracle:
an extraordinary
supernatural sign that
transcends the laws of
nature and points to the
present reality of God's kingdom
reasonable to conclude that a miracle occurred.
If we apply these criteria to all reported instances of miracles, we might discover that
miraculous events are more common than we might assume. In the next section, we'll
consider one of the most surprising and credible miracles of all time—the resurrection.
7. The Resurrection Miracle: Four Facts Plus One
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to support the resurrection miracle with five facts
most New Testament scholars affirm.
The miracle of the resurrection stands at the heart of the Christian faith. Paul declared
that if Jesus was not physically raised, our faith is "futile" (1 Corinthians 15:17). But
is there any evidence that the resurrection actually happened? Biblical scholars Gary
Habermas and Michael Licona have developed an approach to this question based on what
they call the minimal facts. "This approach considers only those data that are so strongly
180 | CHAPTER 11
CHAPTER 11 | 181


<!-- page-7 -->

The Conversion
of St. Paul, by G.
B. Ricci, Chiesa
di Santa Maria,
Traspontina,
Italy
attested historically that they are granted by nearly every scholar who studies the subject,
even the rather skeptical ones? The following four facts are almost indisputable among
New Testament scholars.
Fact 1—Jesus died by crucifixion. Jesus' execution is attested by all four Gospels and
several non-Christian sources: Josephus, Tacitus, Lucian, and Mara bar Serapion. Non-
Christian attestation is especially important since these authors would have had no
ulterior motive for recording Jesus' death. Medical evidence further confirms Jesus' death.
Crucifixion was an extreme form of torture and execution that included intense flogging,
carrying a heavy cross, having your hands and feet nailed to the cross, and then fighting
against suffocation.2 Surviving such an ordeal was not a possibility. The Romans would
have ensured that Jesus was dead before taking him down from the cross (John 19:33).
Fact 2—Jesus' disciples believed he rose and appeared to them. The earliest accounts
of the apostles affirm that they believed Jesus had risen. Having witnessed his physical
post-resurrection appearances, the apostles devoted their lives to proclaiming Jesus'
resurrection. They were willing to risk their lives to proclaim the resurrection; some even
died for that belief. Of course, many people have been killed for their convictions. Still, as
Habermas points out, the "disciples were in the right place to know the truth or falsity"
of the resurrection event." It would be unusual for anyone to willingly die for what they
knew to be a lie. "Liars make poor martyrs.*30
Fact 3—The apostle Paul was radically converted. A known persecutor of the Christian
church, Paul was doing everything in his power to bring Christianity down. He was
undoubtedly familiar with the story that Jesus had risen, but that didn't seem to have
much effect on him. It was only after Paul
had a personal encounter with the risen Christ
that he believed (Acts 9). Paul's remarkable
transformation is evident to historians. He
became one of the leading figures in the
Christian movement, traveling the empire
to proclaim the gospel and authoring several
books of the New Testament.
Fact 4-James, a skeptic and a brother of
Jesus, was suddenly changed. Mark 3:21
reports that at least some of Jesus' family
thought he was "out of his mind." It is likely
that Jesus' brother James was among them. (It's
hard to blame him; what would your brother
have to do to convince you that he was God?)
But later, James became a leader in the Jerusalem church (Acts 15:12-21, Galatians 1:19)
and eventually was martyred for his faith in Jesus. What explains this radical change?
Seeing the risen Jesus (1 Corinthians 15:7)!
To the minimal facts above, Habermas and Licona add:
Fact 5—The tomb was empty. Though it is not as certain as the first four facts, still,
approximately 75 percent) of scholars on the subject accept the empty tomb as a
historical fact.*'l Three lines of evidence point to the empty tomb. First, Jesus' death was
a public event in Jerusalem. If the tomb were not empty, Christianity would not have
exploded in Jerusalem. Second, Jesus enemies acknowledged that the tomb was empty.
Matthew 28:11-15 says that the Jewish leaders, learning of the empty tomb, circulated
the story that the disciples had stolen the body. Finally, all four gospels say that women
were the first witnesses of the empty tomb. In the Jewish and Roman culture of the day,
women's testimony was regarded as unreliable 32 So, there would be no reason to include
this detail unless women really were the earliest witnesses.
8. The Resurrection Miracle: Confronting
Alternative Theories
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to conclude that alternative theories about Jesus'
resurrection do not account for the facts accepted by most New Testament
scholars.
The five facts presented above offer a powerful case for Jesus' resurrection. Still, many
other theories (both ancient and modern) have been put forward
to explain this miracle. To be valid, any alternative theory about
the resurrection must be able to account for the facts. Let's briefly
consider six alternative theories:
• Jesus didn't actually die. The idea here is that people
thought Jesus had died, but in reality, he had simply
swooned. While in the tomb, he was revived by the cool
air; the disciples mistakenly proclaimed this a resurrection.
This theory fails to account for facts 1-4. Medical evidence
suggests that crucifixion killed its victims. Even if Jesus had
survived, he would have been extremely weak and unlikely
to inspire worship in the disciples or anyone else. Moreover,
at Pilate's request, a centurion verified Jesus' death
(Mark 15:44-45).
• The disciples stole the body. This theory fails to account
for facts 2-4. Is it plausible to believe that the disciples, who fled at Jesus' arrest,
suddenly found the courage and strength to overthrow the Roman soldiers guarding
the tomb and then agreed to lie about the resurrection at the cost of their own lives?
Surely, at least one of the disciples would have admitted it had all been a hoax. This
theory doesn't explain the conversions of Paul and James.
• The disciples went to the wrong tomb. There simply is no evidence for this. The
disciples could have verified where Jesus was buried by asking Joseph of Arimathea
and Nicodemus where the tomb was (John 19:38-42) or by looking for the soldiers
who were guarding the tomb (Matthew 27:66). This theory also fails to explain facts
Mary mourns
Jesus, St.
Matthew's
Lutheran
Church,
Charleston, SC,
USA
CHAPTER 11 | 183
182 | CHAPTER 11
APOLOGETICS 9
5 The Supernatural and Truth


<!-- page-8 -->

2-4. The empty tomb alone was not enough to convince anyone that the resurrection
had happened. Upon seeing the empty tomb, Mary thought someone had stolen the
body (John 20:1-18). Most of the disciples did not believe the resurrection happened
until they had seen Jesus (Luke 24, John 20:19-20).
• The disciples hallucinated. This theory fails to explain facts 3-5. Hallucinations
occur in the minds of individuals. Hence, it is rare for two or more people to have
the same hallucination. Yet Jesus appeared before various groups. More than 500
people saw him after his resurrection (1 Corinthians 15:6). Furthermore, Paul
certainly was not grieving Jesus' death and thus was not in a frame of mind to
hallucinate. Finally, if the disciples only
hallucinated, Jesus would still be in the
tomb, a fact which the Pharisees could
have easily verified and used to halt the
spread of Christianity.33
• Jesus rose in a spiritual sense. Some
suggest that Jesus, resurrection was purely
spiritual. They contend that after his
death, the disciples found their hearts
flooded with love and peace, inspired by
Jesus' extraordinary life. So, Jesus "arose" spiritually in their hearts. This theory fails
to adequately explain facts 2-5. An inner feeling cannot explain the empty tomb, nor
is it an adequate basis on which to launch an entire movement. Furthermore, if Jesus'
resurrection was just an inner feeling, no one would have called it a resurrection.
Most likely, Jesus would have been dismissed as one more failed messiah.
• The disciples were superstitious and likely to believe anything. This theory
ignores the evidence and assumes that the first people to believe in Jesus' resurrection
simply couldn't understand that a resurrection was scientifically impossible.
However, no one in the ancient world believed in the possibility of physical
resurrection, apart from some Jews who thought that all of God's people would be
raised at the end of history. Ancient people knew just as well as we do that people
don't usually rise from the dead.
There are many other alternative theories, but all of them fail in some way to account
for the facts. As it turns out, the most reasonable explanation is that Jesus actually rose
from the dead.
9. Existence of Other Supernatural Beings
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to summarize what the Bible teaches about
angels and demons.
Before we conclude this chapter, we need to say a little about other supernatural beings—
specifically angels and demons." In popular culture, angels and demons are often depicted
as tiny creatures whispering in our ears, prompting us toward good and evil. The devil is
pictured with horns, a tail, and a pitchfork in hand, happily ruling over those who burn in
the flames of hell. Such caricatures lead many to dismiss
the reality of these supernatural beings. Yet Scripture's
account of these beings is far different. And if Scriptur's
statements about God and miracles are trustworthy, we
have every reason to take it seriously when it speaks of
angels and demons.
An angel is a supernatural being who serves God by
doing his will and ministering to humans and to God.
In Scripture, angels are God's messengers or
"ministering spirits" (Hebrews 1:14). They seem to
have some authority over humans (Psalm 8:5), and
may guard or defend them (Psalm 91:11, Daniel 6:22).
They may appear to encourage, strengthen, or give a
divine commission (Judges 6:11-23, Matthew 4:11).
Angels sometimes enact judgment on those who do evil
(1 Chronicles 21:15-16, Matthew 13:41, 49) and fight
against evil supernatural forces (Daniel 10:13, Jude 1:9).
They also announce important events (Matthew 28:2-7;
Luke 1:8-20, 26-38).
The presence of angels may seem less evident in our day, but there is no reason to
think that they are not still active. In fact, the author of Hebrews urged believers to
show hospitality to strangers, for in so doing, "some have entertained angels unawares"
(Hebrews 13:2). We simply do not know all the ways that God is sending his ministering
spirits to our aid, but we can be confident that he is watching out for us.
A demon is a fallen angel who incites evil and attempts to
lead humans astray in rebellion against God.
Demons are fallen angels in rebellion against God
(2 Peter 2:4, Revelation 12:9). Though aware of God's power
(Matthew 8:29, James 2:19), they stubbornly attempt to
thwart his plans. Their primary goal is deception-tempting
people to sin, telling lies about God, promulgating false
• demon:
a fallen angel
who incites evil
and attempts
to lead humans
astray in
rebellion
against God
doctrine, and asserting that what is wrong is really right.
Demonic influence likely stands behind many of the false
gods reported in Scripture, as well as the evil human forces
in our world. Ephesians 6:12 reminds us that our battle is
against "the rulers, against the authorities, against the cosmic
powers over this present darkness, against the spiritual forces
of evil in the heavenly places."
o angel:
a supernatural
being who
serves God by
doing his will
and ministering
to humans and
to God
184 | CHAPTER 11
CHAPTER 11 | 185
APOLOGETICS 9
© The Supernatural and Truth


<!-- page-9 -->

Christ the King
monument,
Swiebodzin,
Poland
Scripture sometimes speaks of an individual being who is called Satan or the devil. The
Hebrew word for Satan means accuser or adversary. Satan is in constant rebellion against
God and is antagonistic toward humans and all creation. He is known as the father of
lies (John 8:44) and is identified with "that ancient serpent" who led Adam and Eve into
sin and whose goal is to deceive the whole world (Revelation 12:9). He also accuses and
slanders people before God (Job 1:9-10, Zechariah 3:1), and roams about the earth "like a
roaring lion, seeking someone to devour" (1 Peter 5:8).
While we should take Satan and demons seriously, we do not need to be afraid of
them. All angels, including Satan and demons, are created beings, and God is sovereign
over them. In his earthly ministry, Jesus demonstrated
his power over the forces of evil, casting out demons,
combating their deceptions, and standing against Satan's
temptations. On the cross, Jesus "disarmed the rulers
and authorities and put them to open shame" (Colossians
2:15). All who have trusted Jesus are filled with the Holy
Spirit, the ultimate Strength against the forces of evil. We
are further equipped with the armor of God to defend
against the devil's lies (Ephesians 6:10-18). Though evil
forces still wage war, the outcome is never in doubt. The
forces of evil are no match for God. One day, he will
bring their destructive influence to a decisive end.
10. Conclusion
For some people, belief in the supernatural is a given.
It is hard for them to imagine a world without God,
miracles, angels, or demons. Other people find belief in
the supernatural much more difficult. There are at least
two reasons for this. First, some may hold a worldview
that excludes the possibility of the supernatural. If all that
exists is the material world, and everything has a natural explanation, then there can be no
place for anything supernatural. Yet, such a worldview is quite limiting. Apologist G. K.
Chesterton explains:
Somehow or other an extraordinary idea has arisen that the disbelievers in miracles
consider them coldly and fairly calm[lyl, while believers in miracles accept them only in
connection with some dogma. The fact is quite the other way. The believers in miracles
accept them (rightly or wrongly) because they have evidence for them. The disbelievers
in miracles deny them (rightly or wrongly) because they have a doctrine against them.
... It is we Christians who accept all actual evidence—it is you rationalists who refuse
actual evidence being constrained to do so by your creed. 36
We submit that any worldview that does not consider all available evidence is too small
to adequately explain reality. To fairly evaluate the evidence, we must at least be open
to the possibility of supernatural explanations. This doesn't mean we have to attribute
supernatural.
everything we can't explain naturally to God, only that we keep an open mind about the
Others may not oppose the supernatural outright but have been conditioned to think
that the world has no supernatural dimension or that the supernatural is not relevant to
their lives. If we do not see the evidence for the supernatural, perhaps our eyes are not
open wide enough. Like Elisha's servant in 2 Kings 6, we need someone to open our eyes.
When enemy troops surrounded the city of Dothan where Elisha was staying, his servant
panicked. But Elisha reassured him. "Do not be afraid, for those who are with us are
more than those who are with them. Then Elisha prayed, 'O LoRD, please open his eyes
that he may see» (2 Kings 6:16-17). God opened his eyes, and Elisha's servant saw that
angels surrounded the enemy.
We, too, need to have our eyes opened. For if the supernatural is real, it changes
everything. If God exists, then the world has an inherent purpose or meaning. There
are real moral laws that we must obey. There are miracles; God is active in our lives and
responds to our prayers. We need not cower in fear before God, thinking of him as an
unknowable power. Jesus showed us what God is really like. God is not distant, not just
an explanation for the universe who can be ignored. The Christian God is full of love and
compassion and actively involved in his world.
In the resurrection, Jesus proved that he is stronger than sin and death. His love is
stronger than hate. He turned the world upside down. If Jesus rose, then we must take his
commands seriously. We can't simply do anything we please, but we also have nothing to
fear. 37 The powers of evil have been defeated and all will one day acknowledge that Jesus
is Lord (Philippians 2:9-11). While the spiritual battle still rages, the outcome is assured.
We are fully equipped to engage in this battle through the power of the Holy Spirit.
Knowing that it is not up to us to save the world, we work confidently while praying for
God's truth and justice to prevail.
Christians believe that God is always present with us, communicating his love sometimes
in the most unexpected ways. In the next chapter, well consider how God reveals himself in
the natural world as we examine the relationship between science and faith.
' Ben Keiser, "Falling Asleep in a Secular Culture, Summit Ministries, April 17, 2020, summit.org/
resources/reflect/magic-supernatural-god-secularism/.
2 William Lane Craig, Reasonable Faith: Christian Truth and Apologetics, 3r'ed. (Wheaton, IL: Crossway,
2008), 96.
3 *The Kalam Cosmological Argument, Reasonable Faich with William Lane Craig, video, 0:04:13,
reasonablefaith.org/kalam.
* Jeff Myers, Understanding the Faith: A Survey of Christian Apologetics Colorado Springs, CO: David C.
Cook, 2016), 248.
S Douglas Groothuis, Christian Apologetics: A Comprehensive Case for Biblical Faish, 2'ed. (Downers Grove,
IL: IVP Academic, 2022), 215-16.
"Denyse O'Leary, "Why the Universe Cannot Logically Be Inhnite in Time Backwards" Uncommon Descent
(blog, March 3, 2020, uncommondescent.com/philosophy/why-che-universe-cannor-logically-be-infinite-in-
time-backwards/.
7 Sean McDowell and Jonathan Morrow, Is God Just a Human Invention: And Seventeen Other Questions
CHAPTER 11 | 187
186 CHAPTER 11
5 The Supernatural and Truth


<!-- page-10 -->

Raised by the New Atheists (Grand Rapids, MI: Kregel, 2010), 75-76.
8 "The Kalam Cosmological Argument," 4:13.
' Peter Kreeft, "Argument from Design," peterkreeft.com, accessed April 12, 2023, peterkreeft.com/topics/
design.htm.
1º Peter Kreeft, "Argument from Design."
"Jay W. Richards, "List of Fine-Tuning Parameters," Discovery Institute, January 14, 2015, discovery.org/a/
hine-tuning-parameters/.
1 Hugh Ross, The Creator and the Cosmos (Colorado Springs: NavPress, 1995), 117, quoted in Sean
McDowell and Jonathan Morrow, Is God Just a Human Invention? And Seventeen Other Questions Raised by
the New Atheists (Grand Rapids, MI: Kregel, 2010), 96.
13 Francis Collins, The Language of Life: DNA and the Revolution in Personalized Medicine (New York: Harper
Perennial, 2011), 6.
14 "Fine Tuning," Reasonable Faith with William Lane Craig, video, 0:06:23, reasonablefaith.org/finetuning.
'' See "Appendix: Illustrations of the Tao" in C. S. Lewis, The Abolition of Man: Or, Reflections on Education
with Special Reference to the Teaching of English in the Upper Forms of Schools (New York: HarperCollins,
1944), 83-101.
1 Craig, Reasonable Faith, 172.
1 Francis Beckwith and Gregory Koukl, Relativism: Feet Firmly Planted in Mid-Air (Grand Rapids, MI:
Baker Books, 1998), 69.
18 C. S. Lewis, Mere Christianity (New York: HarperCollins, 1952), 3.
19 "Letter from Thomas Jefferson to John Adams," Encyclopedia Virginia, October 12, 1813,
encyclopediavirginia. org/entries/letter-from-thomas-jefferson-to-john-adams-october-12-1813/
2° David Hume, "Of Miracles," in Writings on Religion, ed. Antony Flew (Chicago: Open Court, 1992), 68, as
quoted in Groothuis, Christian Apologetics, 572.
2 Groothuis, Christian Apologetics, 573.
2 Groothuis, Christian Apologetics, 571-72.
23 Timothy Keller, The Reason for God: Belief in an Age of Skepticism (New York: Riverhead Books, 2008), 99.
2* Craig Keener, Miracles: The Credibility of the New Testament Accounts (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Books,
2011).
25 Lee Strobel, The Case for Miracles: A Journalist Investigates Evidence for the Supernatural (Grand Rapids, MI:
Zondervan, 2018).
26 J. P. Moreland, A Simple Guide to Experience Miracles: Instruction and Inspiration for Living Supernaturally
in Christ (Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2021), 31. Moreland draws these criteria from William Dembski,
who uses them to "determine when it is legitimate to conclude that some phenomenon is the result of a
purposive, intelligent act by an agent and when such a conclusion is unwarranted."
27 Gary R. Habermas and Michael R. Licona, The Case for the Resurrection of Jesus (Grand Rapids, MI: Kregel,
2004), 44.
28 Josh McDowell and Sean McDowell, Evidence for the Resurrection: What It Means for Your Relationship with
God (Ventura, CA: Regal, 2009), 164-69.
2 Gary Habermas, "The Resurrection Appearances of Jesus" in Evidence for God: 50 Arguments for Faith from
the Bible, History, Philosophy, and Science, ed. William A. Dembski and Michael R. Licona (Grand Rapids,
MI: Baker Books, 2010), 174-75.
30 Habermas and Licona, The Case for the Resurrection, 59.
31 Habermas and Licona, The Case for the Resurrection, 70.
32 See Josephus, Antiquities of the Jews, trans. William Whiston, 4.8.15, Project Gutenberg, gutenberg.org/
files/2848/2848-h/2848-h.htm and Origen, Origen Against Celsus, 2.55 in The Writings of Origen, vol. 2,
trans. Frederick Crombie, Project Gutenberg, gutenberg.org/files/70693/70693-h/70693-h.htm.
33 Habermas and Licona, The Case for the Resurrection, 106-07.
34N. T. Wright, The Resurrection of the Son of God (Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 2003).
35 This section deals exclusively with angels who interact with human beings, demons, and Satan. We do not
discuss other supernatural beings presented in Scripture, such as archangels, cherubim, and seraphim. Nor
do we address Nephilim, giants, dragons, the Behemoth, and Leviathan, among others.
36G. K. Chesterton, Orthodoxy (New York: John Lane Company, 1908), 278-80.
37 Keller, The Reason for God, 210.
CHAPTER 11 | 189
188 | CHAPTER 11
