# Chapter 12

<!-- page-1 (book p.12) -->

Christianity and
1. Introduction
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to discern that science and faith are not in
opposition to one another.
In Chapter 10, we looked very briefly at the relationship between science and religion.
It's now time to examine that relationship at a greater depth. This is a crucial topic
for apologetics because many people today believe science and faith are enemies. For
example, atheist philosopher Sam Harris argues that "the conflict between religion and
science is unavoidable;" he supposes you can hold on to your religious beliefs or you can
courageously pursue science, but you cannot do both! This view buys into the popular
myth about a perpetual war between science and faith. Here's how philosopher Peter
Harrison, sums up this myth:
Science is said to have had its origins in Greek antiquity when philosophers first broke
away from the myths of their forebears and sought rational explanations for natural
phenomena. Science subsequently suffered a setback with the advent of Christianity,
EDSTMESO
going into significant decline in the Middle Ages. But it then
IN CỐP WE PHUSU
emerged triumphant with the scientific revolution of the
KIENCE.
seventeenth century when it finally broke away from religion
and set out on its progressive path to the present.?
This myth is widely believed in our own time. But is it
true? Is there really a conflict between science and faith?
Does the Christian faith hinder scientific inquiry? These are
questions we'll consider in this chapter. Along the way, we'll discover that Christianity
played a significant role in the founding of modern science. We'll also learn about the
origins debate, the nature of the universe, life and death, scientific contributions to
religious understandings, and more. Before we dive in, we need to understand two key
words-science and faith.
The word science comes from the Latin scientia, which means knowledge. In the
Middle Ages, scientia did not specifically refer to the study of the natural world. Rather,
it was used for any field of knowledge approached in a systematic way. So, people spoke
of a science of music, a science of geometry, and so on. Today, we define science as the
systematic inquiry into nature by means of observation, experiment, and theory construction?
Modern science deals with two primary concerns: how things originated and how things
work. Scientific inquiry typically involves a series of steps:
1. Find a question to explore.
2. Research by observing and investigating.
3. Construct a hypothesis.
4. Test the hypothesis through
experimentation or other systematic
observations.
5. Analyze the data from testing.
6. Form a conclusion.
7. Communicate your findings.
Our culture values scientific knowledge: if
I science:
the systematic
inquiry into
nature by means
of observation,
experiment,
and theory
construction
something has scientific backing, it is considered
objectively true. Yet, scientists and scientific
methods are limited and fallible. All scientists
must begin with certain assumptions, which may
or may not be scientifically provable. They must make guesses about what to research and
how. They conduct experiments which are subject to human error. That is why scientific
theories are always subject to revision.
CHAPTER 12 | 191


<!-- page-2 -->

Some would argue that faith is the opposite of science. They think faith is a belief not
based on evidence but on tradition, authority, or revelation.* In Scripture, we learn
that "faith is the assurance of things hoped for, the conviction of things not seen"
(Hebrews 11:1). To please God, we must trust in him (Hebrews 11:6). In Chapter 7, we saw
that faith means trust in and allegiance to someone or something. And Christian faith, as we
have emphasized throughout this book, is not blind. It is a confident trust in triune God
based on reason and evidence. Christian faith does not require us to check our brains at the
door but rather to engage them in the pursuit of truth wherever it is found. As Jesus taught,
we are to love God with all our mind... and heart, soul, and strength (Matthew 22:37).
With these definitions in place, let's begin our investigation.
2. The Relationship between Christianity and
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to analyze and critique three main views that
attempt to describe the relationship between science and Christianity.
There are three main approaches to
the relationship between Christianity
& scientism:
the belief
that science
is the best or
only way to
obtain reliable
knowledge
and science-the conflict view,
the complementary view, and the
collaborative view.
The conflict view. This view says
that science and religious faith are in
perpetual conflict. Those who promote
this view, like Richard Dawkins, often
regard faith as belief in the absence of
evidence. Conflict-view advocates may
accept two underlying tenets.
The first tenet is scientism, the belief
that science is the best or only way to obtain reliable knowledge. If scientism is true, the
knowledge that religion has to offer is either irrelevant or, at best, secondary to scientific
findings.
The second tenet underlying the conflict view is naturalism, which, as we saw in
Chapter 11, is the belief that all phenomena can be explained in terms of natural causes.
Belief in naturalism often translates into methodological naturalism, the belief that when
it comes to scientific inquiry, no supernatural explanations can be invoked.
However, those who accept these tenets face significant problems. First, scientism is
self-refuting. Since it is a philosophical claim, scientism cannot be demonstrated using
the scientific method. Another problem for scientism is that scientific inquiry relies
on several philosophical assumptions, which cannot be demonstrated from science?
Finally, methodological naturalism arbitrarily limits the scope of knowledge, ruling out
supernatural explanations before gathering evidence.
Surprisingly, some Christians also accept the conflict view; and as a result, they diminish
or reject legitimate scientific discoveries. They arbitrarily limit the scope of knowledge to
only what the Bible can tell us, rejecting all other means of gaining knowledge, including
reason and experimentation. Taking such a position ignores the long Christian tradition of
engaging with and learning from the natural world.
The complementary view. Sometimes called the two-domain view, the complementary view
holds that though religion and science are both valuable, they exist in entirely separate
domains that never directly interact. Science studies
the natural world, religion studies the supernatural
world, and never the two shall meet. In this view,
there can be no real conflict between science and
Christianity since they speak to entirely different
things. Yet, this also means that they cannot
collaborate in any meaningful sense. In this view,
science cannot inform Christianity, and Christianity
cannot inform science. However, in reality, it is
impossible to keep these domains entirely separate.
& methodological
naturalism:
when it comes to
scientific inquiry,
no supernatural
explanations can
be invoked
So, when there is an overlap between science and
faith, one or the other will be given priority, usually
to the detriment of the other.
The collaborative view. Similar to the complementary view, the collaborative view
rejects scientism and argues that both science and religion are important. However,
unlike the complementary view, the collaborative view holds that science and faith
interact and can work together for mutual benefit. For example, physicist John
Polkinghorne argued that there is a "cousinly relationship" between Christianity and
science, both of which are "truth-seeking endeavors." This collaboration provides the
much-needed meaning that science alone, which focuses on explanation, cannot provide.
Science, on its own, cannot answer ethical questions. Without faith to help answer
the why questions, science is in danger of running amuck. At the same time, scientific
discovery continually challenges believers to examine the evidence for their beliefs,
leading them to a stronger, more robust faith.
Those who hold the conflict view believe that a commitment to Christianity is as
good as committing intellectual suicide, abandoning science in favor of religious dogma.
However, people who hold the collaborative view believe science and faich can be held
together in a way that neither diminishes science nor abandons traditional beliefs about
God. Christian physicist John Polkinghorne wrote that a "critical encounter with the
findings and methods of modern science" could provide the evidential foundation for much
of Christian belief and that theologians should be as open to new data as scientists are
expected to be.? Given this openness, the collaborative view provides the broadest possible
frame within which to explore the natural world.
CHAPTER 12 | 193
192 | CHAPTER 12
APOLOGETICS S


<!-- page-3 -->

3. Christianity and the Development of Modern
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to refute claims that Christianity interferes
with scientific inquiry by offering examples of how Christians promoted the
advancement of modern science.
The narrative that says Christianity is a hindrance to science bases itself on a handful
of widely believed myths. For example, there is the myth that after the fall of Rome,
Christianity plunged the world into a thousand-year dark age during which science was
unable to flourish. Another myth is that medieval theologians believed the earth was flat,
rejecting clear evidence to the contrary. A third myth is that the pioneers of early modern
science were skeptics who bucked church authority.®
Despite the popularity of these myths, a careful look
at history reveals a different story. Far from hindering
the development of modern science, Christianity played
a significant role in spurring people on to scientific
discovery. Let's consider some evidence for this claim.
Science requires a couple of critical assumptions.
First, scientists must assume that the cosmos behaves
somewhat orderly and predictable. Without order or
predictability, scientists could not confidently make
hypotheses or perform tests that would yield reliable
results. This core assumption is rooted in the Bible.
Consider Jeremiah 31:35-36:
Thus says the LoRD, who gives the sun for light by day and the fixed order of the moon and
the stars for light by night.... If this fixed order departs from before me, declares the LORD,
then shall the offspring of Israel cease from being a nation before me forever.
This passage was crucial to the development of the idea that natural laws govern the
universe and make science possible?
Second, scientists must assume that our minds are reliable enough to help us gain
true knowledge about the world. Without a rational designer, however, this assumption
is difficult to justify. God gave human beings the ability to reason when he created us in
his image (Genesis 1:27). Because of this, we are able to reason about the universe, form
hypotheses, perform experiments, and infer conclusions from the data.
Christians have long believed knowledge can be discovered through God's two
"books"-Scripture and nature. Psalm 19:1-2 affirms, "The heavens declare the glory of
God, and the sky above proclaims his handiwork. Day to day pours out speech, and night
to night reveals knowledge."
Theophilus, a second-century Christian bishop, believed that God is known "by his
works" in creation—from the regularity of the seasons to plants and animal instincts.!°
The Middle Ages saw the flourishing of natural philosophy, which focused on the study
of nature, alongside the study of theology. Peter Abelard (1079-1142AD) believed that
human beings were capable of discerning the difference between God's miracles in
creation and ordinary natural phenomena." John Buridan (1295-1358) argued that
the natural order of the universe originated
in God's design.? Furthermore, in medieval
universities, which were conceived and founded
by Christians, one-third of the liberal arts
curriculum was devoted to the study of nature
and mathematics. Medieval scholars knew
that the earth was round and found no
discontinuity between religious faith and the
study of nature.
Modern science came into its own in the
seventeenth century. Many of the key figures of
this movement were motivated in their scientific
endeavors by theistic assumptions. For example, when establishing the scientific method,
Francis Bacon (1561-1626) used biblical language to warn against idols that would corrupt
a scientist—self-deception, prejudice, misuse of words, and false persuasion. Robert Boyle
(1627-1691), a founder of modern chemistry, wrote The Christian Virtuoso, outlining
the qualities necessary for a Christian to excel in the sciences. The astronomer Johannes
Kepler (1571-1630) was motivated by his belief that "God, like a human architect,
approached the founding of the world according to order and rule." Isaac Newton
(1643-1727), the legendary mathematician, physicist, astronomer, and theologian, viewed
scientific inquiry into nature as a religious duty.!
This brief survey reveals a long tradition of Christians engaging with the natural world
in ways that fully integrate Christian theological truths.
4. Science, the Bible, and the Church
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to summarize how the scientific theories of
Copernicus, Brahe, and Galilei caused conflict in the Catholic church.
Occasionally, scientific discoveries create an apparent conflict between Christianity and
science. Perhaps no episode better illustrates this than Galileo Galile's (1564-1642)
run-in with the Catholic Church. In popular retellings of the story, the Church
interrogated, imprisoned, and silenced Galileo's discoveries, which would have overturned
the notion that Earth was a fixed point around which the planets revolve. The real story,
however, is more complex.
In 1542, astronomer Nicolaus Copernicus (1473-1543) wrote a book proposing
a model for how the planets (including Earth) revolved around the sun. However, in
Galileo's time, the commonly accepted view among scientists and theologians was that of
Tycho Brahe (1546-1601). Brahe agreed with Copernicus' model that the planets revolved
around the sun, but he did not agree that the Earth revolved around the sun, too. Instead,
CHAPTER 12 | 195
| CHAPTER 12
APOLOGETICS 9


<!-- page-4 -->

GALILEO GALIL
Galileo Galilei,
by Aristodemo
Costoli, 1851,
Uffizi, Florence,
Italy
Brahe thought the sun revolved around the Earth. Brahe's model is sometimes called the
Tychonic or Tychonian System. At the time, theologians interpreted Scripture (Psalm 104:5,
1 Chronicles 16:30) in ways that led them to think Brahe was correct.
In 1609, Galileo constructed a telescope that allowed him to make observations that
supported (though did not prove) Copernicus' theory. Initially, the Catholic Church
celebrated these discoveries. Galileo, a Catholic, dialogued on science
and the Bible with Cardinal Robert Bellarmine (1542-1621). Bellarmine
concluded that despite Galileo's discoveries, there was insufficient
evidence to reinterpret Scripture.
In 1616, the Catholic Church declared the idea of a moving Earth
to be "altogether contrary to Holy Scripture," and placed a temporary
ban on Copernicus' book. Not everyone in the Church agreed with the
ban, including Bellarmine and the soon-to-be Pope Urban VIII (though
he did not expressly agree with Copernicus either). Galileo's outspoken
views in his 1632 book Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World
Systems got him into trouble. In it, he overstated the evidence for his
view and mocked Pope Urban VIII as a simpleton. So, Galilei was tried,
condemned under the suspicion of heresy, and confined to house arrest
for life.
Given that the Copernican system was correct, this episode was
embarrassing for the church. However, the controversy was primarily
about Galileo arguing against the dominant scientific view of his day.
Historian and philosopher of science Michael Keas affirms, "The Galileo
affair was not an episode of science versus Christianity; rather, it was
an episode of the dominant scientific view versus the minority scientific
view.... Indeed, if Galileo had been more tactful, modest, and patient in his attempt to
reform his own church, there might have been no trial."!)
There are three important lessons we can gather from this historical example.
1. Changing the majority view takes time. Galileo's contemporaries rightly
required significant evidence to change their minds. As it turns out, the
Copernican system was not widely established until a generation after Galileo.
We should be open to new scientific theories and wait for sufficient evidence to be
available before we accept them.
2. Just because the majority accepts a view does not mean it is correct. We
ought to be careful about interpreting Scripture to fit in with dominant scientific
theories, especially when good scientific arguments challenge the majority view.
3. Rightly understood, science and the Bible do not conflict. Sometimes, conflicts
appear based on misunderstandings of Scripture or science. However, as Galileo
rightly understood, the Bible is not a science textbook, and it speaks of nature
from the perspective of an unaided observer. We should not expect the biblical
authors to align with modern scientific views when they had neither the technical
vocabulary nor the tools available to contemporary scientists.
For fruitful collaboration between Christianity and science, both must be open to
the possibility of change. As Polkinghorne observed, the fundamental question for
Christianity and any scientific theory should be, "What makes you think this might be
true? 2 Rethinking your beliefs in light of new evidence can be scary. Still, we cannot
allow fear to hinder the quest for truth. If Christianity is true, we have nothing to fear.
5. The Nature of the Universe
› OBJECTIVE: You will be able to explain how quantum theory, the anthropic
principle, and time support the existence of God.
In the remainder of this chapter, we'll examine a sampling of areas in which science and
Christianity maintain a fruitful partnership. Let's start with three items related to physics
and astronomy that give insight into the nature of the universe.
Quantum. Some physicists believe that the material universe is sufficient to itself, a closed
system without the need for outside causation. Yet, studies in quantum theory have shown
that the material universe is incomplete, "neither a self-contained nor a self-sustaining
entity." Instead, our universe is dependent on something that both "transcends" the material
and "completes" it.2' This makes ample room for a supernatural dimension. Theoretical
physicist Stephen Barr says that quantum mechanics makes belief in God easier in an
indirect way "by providing an argument
against materialism... which is the main
intellectual opponent of belief in God in
today's world."22
The regularity of nature-that is, the laws
of nature that make science possible-also
reveal the incompleteness of the material
universe. These laws might exist for one of
three reasons: necessity, chance, or design.
Theories of necessity and chance, however,
have proven unworkable. From a scientific
standpoint, it is more plausible that the laws
of nature were put in place by an intelligent
designer—that is, God, in whom "we live
and move and have our being" (Acts 17:28).
In fact, so much evidence has accumulated for this conclusion that one philosopher of
science declares, "Not only is divine action detectable in the origin of the universe and the
fine-tuning of its initial conditions, regularities, and constants, quantum physics reveals it
to be necessary for the causal integrity and ... coherence of the universe."
The anthropic principle. When we consider mountain peaks, oceans, and galaxies, we
may wonder how human beings could possibly matter. King David had similar feelings:
CHAPTER 12 | 197
1 CHAPTER 12
APOLOGETICS 9


<!-- page-5 -->

When I look at your night sky and see the work of your fingers—
the moon and the stars you set in place-
what are mere mortals that you should think about them,
human beings that you should care for them? —Psalm 8:3-4, NLT
Though we may appear insignificant, David's words suggest that we are of great
significance to God. Similarly, a prominent scientific idea known as the anthropic principle
points to human significance due to intelligence. The anthropic principle is the theory
that the universe contains all the necessary properties that make the existence of intelligent life
inevitable.
The anthropic principle tells us that "we can observe the universe only because it
exists in a way that allows us as observers to exist."4 We have already seen evidence of the
fine-tuning of the universe in Chapter 11.
And humans are the only beings known to
& anthropic principle: the theory
that the universe contains all the
necessary properties that make
the existence of intelligent life
inevitable
be capable of doing science and asking the
big questions about life. These facts point
to the existence of God, who made humans
with minds capable of investigating and
understanding his world.
Time. At a basic level, time is the thing that
keeps events flowing or that which "keeps
everything from happening at once."' Most
physicists today agree that time began at a
fixed point in the past. The second law of
thermodynamics shows that we are moving forward from a "fixed and immutable past,
[through] the present, towards the unknown and unfixed future?"26
But where did time come from? Some theologians believe that God is outside of
time, and if this is so, then God is the Creator of time. Scripture says that God is "from
everlasting to everlasting," while the days of human beings are limited (Psalm 90). It speaks
of eternity while measuring time from a definite beginning to a definite end. Time began
at creation and will end on the last day, when the final judgment occurs (Matthew 13:39,
John 12:48).2 Scientists affirm that time is moving toward an unknown future. Scripture
suggests something similar but goes beyond it. The end of the time-bound universe is the
beginning of a new creation, of which the Bible gives only a brief but exciting glimpse
(Revelation 21-22).
6. The Science of Origins
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to defend the assertion that an intelligent
designer is the best explanation for the origin of life.
Let's focus on one of the most contentious issues in the science and faith dialogue-
biological origins. In 1859, naturalist Charles Darwin published On the Origin of Species,
in which he put forth his theories of evolution and universal common descent, the theory
that all life on Earth originated from a single organism.
Darwin argued that species could undergo radical changes over long periods, eventually
evolving into majorly different species (macroevolution). He held that evolution occurred
through an unguided process of natural selection acting on random genetic variation.
Darwinian evolution (in a modified form) is now the majority view among scientists.
Some believe it has eliminated the need for God. Yet, scientists cannot satisfactorily
account for the appearance of design in nature. Some argue that the unguided process of
evolution can mimic design and that no intelligent designer is needed. But is this the case?
We first considered DNA in the previous chapter, but let's look closer.
DNA is a large molecular structure of encoded information essential to all life. When
James Watson and Francis Crick discovered the structure of DNA in 1953, they found
that DNA stores information, provides instructions, and performs specific functions in a
cell. DNA works like a type of written language or computer code. But where did DNA
come from? Darwin's theory did not answer this since it only considered how new life
forms could arise from "simpler," pre-existing forms. "It did not explain how the first
life ... might have arisen to begin with."28
The great challenge for scientists who assume methodological naturalism is to explain
how life could have arisen from nonlife. Initially, some scientists suggested that life
arose through pure chance. After all, random chance accidents are known to occur.
Statistically speaking, this is highly improbable. In fact, "the probability of producing
a single functional protein... by chance alone
stands at a 'vanishingly small' 1 chance in 10164°
per philosopher of science Stephen Meyer.?)
Others speculated that life arose from inanimate
matter via unguided chemical reactions on the
early Earth, perhaps in a kind of primordial
d universal common descent:
the theory that all life on
Earth originated from a single
organism
soup. One experiment attempting to replicate the
atmosphere of early Earth yielded some favorable
results. However, later, it was found riddled with
problems and, ultimately, unhelpful. 3°Still others
suggest that life arose through RNA rather than
DNA. This suggestion is problematic. To cite just
one reason, RNA cannot assemble in the ways necessary for life without the guidance of a
skilled chemist. The failure of these three hypotheses led the chemist George Whitesides to
declare, "Most chemists believe, as do I, that life emerged spontaneously from mixtures of
molecules in the prebiotic Earth. How? I have no idea. I
There is, however, another explanation for the origin of life-namely, that an intelligent
designer brought life into being. Some scientists charge that this is merely "God in the
gaps." They argue Christians unscientifically insert a theological proposition to make up
for the current lack of scientific knowledge. Yet, positing an intelligent designer is only
unscientific if methodological naturalism is assumed. There are good reasons for invoking
CHAPTER 12 | 199
CHAPTER 12
APOLOGETICS G


<!-- page-6 -->

an intelligent designer that have nothing to do with the Christian faith. For example, we
know that information-rich systems come from intelligent minds. Meyer also comments,
"Uniform and repeated experience affirms that intelligent agents produce information-rich
systems, whether software programs, ancient inscriptions, or Shakespearean sonnets."32
To entertain an explanation from intelligent design is not to be unscientific but to be
open to following the evidence wherever it leads. Given the discoveries of science, the most
natural explanation for the origin of life and the appearance of design is that there was, in
fact, an intelligent Designer-God-behind it all.
7. Four Christian Views of Origins
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to critique four theories on how God created the
universe and life.
The existence of an intelligent designer who stands behind the first life is consistent with
the Bible's claim that God created the universe and life within it. But how exactly did
God create? While all Christians acknowledge belief
in an intelligent designer, they have taken four
positions regarding the details, 33
Young-Earth Creationism. This view holds that
God created the universe in six literal 24-hour
days as recently as 6,000 years ago. Young-Earth
creationists reject evolution, believing that science
should be interpreted from the standpoint of the
Bible and not the other way around. They rely
on an essentially literal reading of Genesis. The
idea of a young Earth is at odds with scientific
evidence pointing to an old Earth. One of the most
significant challenges for young-Earth creationists is explaining the existence of galaxies
and stars that are billions of light years away. An organization representing young-Earth
creationism is Answers in Genesis.
Old-Earth Creationism. This view holds that the days of creation are not literal 24-
hour days but more extended periods. Old-Earth creationists believe God created basic
living organisms separately, allowing them to change and adapt in a limited sense
(microevolution). Human beings were the last creatures God created supernaturally.
While accepting the majority view on the universe's age, old-Earth creationists reject
the idea of universal common descent. Old-Earth creationists interpret some things in
Genesis 1-2 in less literal ways than young-Earth creationists, though some people find
these interpretations speculative. They wonder how animal death before the fall (implied
by the old-Earth view) could be a part of God's good creation. Old-Earth creationism is
represented by the organization Reasons to Believe. 34
Intelligent Design. This view represents scientists who have found weaknesses in the
majority view of origins, especially evolutionary biology. Intelligent design does not
specifically address interpretations of Genesis 1-2, Focusing instead on the scientific
arguments. Aside from questioning evolution, intelligent design researchers produce
positive arguments for design. This view encourages methodological pluralism, allowing
the possibility of supernatural causes in science. Though a minority view among secular
scientists, intelligent design has gained traction in Christian circles. However, some
Christians worry that intelligent design does not pay enough attention to integrating the
Bible and science. An organization behind intelligent design research is The Discovery
Institute. 35
Theistic Evolution/Evolutionary Creationism. This view holds that Genesis 1-2 is
not primarily interested in telling us how everything was created, but instead that it
was created. Evolutionary creationists generally symbolically interpret Genesis 1-2.
Those who hold this view accept the majority view of universal common descent but see
God as the one who stands behind the evolutionary process. One challenge to theistic
evolution is Paul's argument in 1 Corinthians 11:8-12, which arguably depends upon
his understanding that Adam and Eve were historical (not merely symbolic) persons and
that Eve was formed miraculously from Adam's rib rather than from animal parents.
Scientifically, theistic evolutionists must also face the growing body of scientific literature
critiquing evolution. BioLogos is a Christian organization promoting theistic evolution.36
While sharing a belief in an intelligent designer, whom Christians identify as God,
these views cannot all be correct. We should note that there are able scientists who take
the Bible very seriously in each of these camps. We cannot, in this short space, examine
each of these views in detail. Before accepting any given theory, every Christian needs to
carefully consider each view's biblical and scientific basis.
8. The Nature of Human Life and Death
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to contrast dualism and physicalism, and
articulate the Christian explanation of when life begins and ends.
As we have seen, science and faith can collaborate fruitfully in the realm of biological
origins. Beyond origins, however, we also need
to consider what science and faith can tell us
about human life and death.
What is a human? We are beings who have
both material (body) and nonmaterial (soul)
aspects. The soul is that part of us to which we
ascribe consciousness. This is our self-awareness,
including our sensations, thoughts, desires,
memories, acts of free choice, and more? Most
o dualism:
soul and body
are separate
things
people believe in dualism, which is the belief
that soul and body are separate things.
CHAPTER 12 | 201
200 | CHAPTER 12
S Christianity and Science


<!-- page-7 -->

Others argue for physicalism, which is the belief that soul and body are ultimately one
physical thing.
For a physicalist, the soul is nothing other than the physical brain. So, the sensation we
call "falling in love" is simply a chemical reaction in the brain. But mental states cannot
be reduced to mere physicality because they have intentionality-thoughts are about
something. Suppose a neurologist did a brain scan on you when you were imagining a
meal. The neurologist would see the molecules
of your brain cells, but he or she would not
be able to describe your thoughts. Molecules
o physicalism:
soul and body
are ultimately
one physical
thing
alone do not convey specific meaning or
intentionality. Something more is occurring
beyond the mere physical. 38
The fact that God made Adam out of the
dust of the ground (ordinary matter) and
that God breathed into him the breath of life
suggests that body and soul are two different
things (Genesis 2:7). Dualism is further
suggested by Ecclesiastes 12:7 and Matthew 10:28. However, we should note that humans
are not souls in disposable bodies. Scripture affirms our wholeness and that both our body
and soul will be redeemed.
When does human life begin? This question is of vital importance in the abortion
debate. If life begins at conception, then aborting a baby in the womb can never be
justified. Scientific evidence makes it abundantly clear that life begins when egg and
sperm join at the moment of conception. Numerous peer-reviewed scientific papers and
medical textbooks support this claim.3 One study surveyed 5,577 biologists from 1,058
academic institutions around the world and found that 96 percent affirmed that life
begins at conception.*o
The Bible places a high value on human life, even in its earliest stages. Poetically, King
David celebrates how God formed him in the womb:
For you formed my inward parts;
you knitted me together in my mother's womb....
My frame was not hidden from you,
when I was being made in secret...
Your eyes saw my unformed substance. —Psalm 139:13, 15-16
If God places such a high value on human life, how much should we value it?
When does human life end? Death happens to all of us in this fallen world. Many long
to extend life as long as possible. Some have looked to cryonics, hoping live bodies can be
frozen and then reanimated if the technology becomes available." Others are exploring
the possibility that our minds could be uploaded to computers.*2 Others, in contrast,
believe that euthanasia—the practice of intentionally ending a life to reduce pain—is
morally acceptable.
In Christian theology, death is unnatural—-it is not the way that things were supposed
to be. Death is the great enemy of humanity (1 Corinthians 15:26). Christianity offers a
solution, and it involves neither artificial extension of life nor premature ending of it. On
the cross, Christ defeated the great enemy (Hebrews 2: 14-15, 2 Timothy 1:10). He offers
eternal life to all who accept it (John 5:24). "While we continue to live in a world where
death is a reality, its power has been lost and its unnaturalness has been shown for what
it is. Just as Jesus rose from the grave, so too, (Christians] will rise again with him
(2 Timothy 2:11, Romans 6:8) 43
9. The Science of Health and Medicine
› OBJECTIVE: You will be able to explain that Scripture encourages the use of
medicine for healing the body.
A myth about Christianity and science is that Christians opposed medicine because they
believed that demons caused illness and illness should be cured through miracles. Sadly,
some extremists do hold such views and urge their followers to avoid modern medicine.
Scripture encourages the use of medicine (Proverbs 17:22, Isaiah 38:21, Ezekiel 47:12). It
also describes God as a healer (Exodus 15:26, Psalm 103:3) and supports physicians and
other health professionals (Genesis 50:2, Exodus 1:21, Jeremiah 8:22, Colossians 4:14).
The New Testament features numerous accounts of miraculous healings, including
healings from demon possession. Spiritual sickness (sin) and demon possession are real,
and early Christians believed in the power of prayer to effect healing (James 5:14-15).
However, they also believed that caring
for a person's material needs was of utmost
importance (Acts 2:45), and this would
imply using medicine where appropriate.
Early Christians believed that many
diseases and illnesses resulted from natural
causes, which encouraged the search
for natural remedies." Jesus came to be
known in early Christianity as the "Divine
Physician," the true Healer of body and
soul. As imitators of Christ, many Christians "responded to Jesus' healing imperative by
dedicating themselves to the practice of medicine," and Christian doctors made use of all
the best in medicine, though they would not perform abortions or assist in suicide. t
What about Christians opposing particular kinds of medication or drugs: For example,
some argue that Christians opposed anesthesia because they believed that God intended
women to experience pain in childbirth per Genesis 3:16.* Historian Timothy Larsen
has shown that the opposite is to true: "In fact, the inventor of chloroform received fan
mail from ministers of the major denominations thanking him for helping to alleviate the
suffering of women in labor. Wisdom is always required.
CHAPTER 12 | 203
202 | CHAPTER 12
© Christianity and Science


<!-- page-8 -->

204 | CHAPTER 12
Today, one of the most pressing issues is mental health. The National Institute of
Mental Health estimates that one in five US adults live with a cognitive, behavioral, or
emotional disorder ranging from mild to severe. Common disorders include anxiety,
depression, and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, among others. In the past,
having a mental illness was considered shameful or embarrassing. Some people have been
suspicious of psychotherapy or other forms of mental health therapy. Yet, having anxiety
or depression does not necessarily signal a lack of faith. It is wise and courageous to
seek help (Proverbs 11:14, 13:14). Treatment for a mental illness depends on its type and
severity. Since body and soul are uniquely integrated, seeking both spiritual and physical
help is wise.*
10. Conclusion
As we have seen in this chapter, the actual conflict is not between science and
Christianity but between scientism and methodological naturalism opposing Christianity.
If we reduce the scope of reliable knowledge to only what can be discovered through
science or refuse to allow nonmaterial explanations, our study of creation will be severely
limited and distorted. That is one reason Christianity provides the context in which
science can flourish.
If there is to be a fruitful collaboration between Christian faith and scientific inquiry,
then both Christians and scientists can investigate the benefit of following the evidence
and where it may lead. Recall the Galileo controversy. At the time, most scientists held
to the Tychonic system, and the church, by and large, interpreted Scripture in alignment
with that view. As it turned out, church leaders and scientists were both wrong. Both
needed to be open to new evidence that would cause them to revise their views. This
eventually happened.
Throughout this chapter, we have seen several ways science and the Christian faith
are allies. To maintain this partnership, all parties need to employ patience in the face
of discoveries, thoroughness in investigating questions of scientific theory and biblical
interpretation, and openness to learning from
one another. Christians need to be careful
not to force Scripture to fit with the latest
scientific theories while also being open to
reevaluating their understanding of Scripture
when science sheds new light on a particular
issue. Scientists should avoid the self-refuting
claim that science alone leads to reliable
knowledge, and they should also assess how
Christian faith can enhance science. As
we close this chapter, let's consider two people who demonstrated this non-reactionary,
collaborative approach.
John Wesley (1703-1791), a preacher and theologian, founded the Methodist church.
Though not a qualified scientist. Wesley "maintained a lifelong interest in the natural
sciences."s He wrote several books about science, seeking to bring Scripture and science
into harmony. He regularly drew on scientists like Bacon, Boyle, and Newton. Wesley
often used scientific ideas in his sermons to illuminate the biblical text. He prioritized
facts over mere speculation, and "he sought to engage in theology that was consonant
with the best in science."51
Our second example is William Whewell (1794-1866), an English philosopher-
scientist and one of his time's most prominent Christian
intellectuals. Though an acquaintance of Charles Darwin,
Whewell found himself at odds with Darwin on some critical
issues. Unlike Darwin, Whewell advocated methodological
pluralism and believed that supernatural causes best explained
some things in nature. Though he advocated for intelligent (and
supernatural) design to explain the progressive appearance of
new life forms on earth, Whewell nonetheless insisted that origin
hypotheses in biology be evaluated on scientific, not theological,
grounds.52
Many other Christian intellectuals in science and theology
carry on this tradition today. Their work is a testament to the
ongoing positive collaboration between Christian faith and
scientific inquiry. As scholar Michael Keas sums up:
This collaboration can be mutually beneficial today, just as
it has been historically. Christianity offers a worldview that
supports both scientific progress and the path to human flourishing through Jesus
Christ. Anyone, scientist or not, can benefit from integrating science and theology.
Open up your heart and mind to the exciting adventure of reading and appropriately
responding to God's two books—nature and Scripture?
ENDNOTES - 12
' Sam Harris, Letter to a Christian Nation (New York: Knopf, 2006), 63.
2 Peter Harrison, The Territories of Science and Religion (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2015), 22.
3 William A. Dembski, Casey Luskin, and Joseph M. Holden, eds., The Comprehensive Guide to Science and
Faith: Exploring the Ultimate Questions About Life and the Cosmos (Eugene, OR: Harvest House, 2021), 22.
* Richard Dawkins, A Devil's Chaplain: Reflections on Hope, Lies, Science, and Love (New York: Mariner,
2004), 242-48.
J. P. Moreland, Science or Scientism?: When Theoretic Commitments Become Religious Belief (Lafayette, IN:
Ratio Christi Press, 2023), 5-7.
• John C. Polkinghorne, One World: The Interaction of Science and Theology (West Conshohocken, PA:
Templeton Foundation Press, 2007), x.
* John Polkinghorne, The Faith of a Physicist: Reflections of a Bottom-Up Thinker (Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 1994), 1-5.
• For a thorough refutation of these myths, see Michael N. Keas, The Myth of Science us. Religion: The True
Story of Faith and Reason (Lafayette, IN: Ratio Christi Press, 2023).
' Christopher B. Kaiser, Toward a Theology of Scientific Endeavour: The Descent of Science, Ashgate Science and
Religion Series (Aldershot, England: Ashgate, 2007), 48.
1º William A. Dembski et al., The Patristic Understanding of Creation: An Anchology of Writings from the
Church Fathers on Creation and Design (Riesel, TX: Erasmus Press, 2008), 91-92.
'Peter Abelard and Wanda Zemler-Cizewski, An Exposition on the Six-Day Work, vol. 15, Corpus
William Whewell,
by James
Lonsdale, 1825,
Trinity College,
Cambridge, UK
CHAPTER 12 | 205


<!-- page-9 -->

Christianorum Continuatio Mediaevalis (Turnhout: Brepols, 2011), 55.
" John Buridan, Quaestiones super octo physicorum libros Aristotelis (Paris, 1509), II.13, fol. 39b, as cited
in Joel Biard, "The Natural Order in John Buridan," in J. M. M. H. Thijssen and Jack Zupko, eds., The
Metaphysics and Natural Philosopby of John Buridan, 77-95 (Leiden: Brill, 2001), 82.
13 See Edward Grant, God and Reason in the Middle Ages (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001).
"David C. Lindberg and Ronald L. Numbers, "Beyond War and Peace: A Reappraisal of the Encounter
between Christianity and Science," in Church History 55, no. 3 (Cambridge University Press, 1986), 342.
15 Steven Shapin, Never Pure: Historical Studies of Science as If It Was Produced by People with Bodies, Situated
in Time, Space, Culture, and Society, and Struggling for Credibility and Authority (Baltimore: John Hopkins,
2010), 48.
16 Shapin, Never Pure, 197-99.
' Johannes Kepler, as quoted in Melissa Cain Travis, "Three-Part Harmony: The Remarkable Relationship
between Mind, Matter, and Mathematics," Houston Christian University, March 28, 2017, hc.edu/news-
and-events/2017/03/28/three-part-harmony-remarkable-relationship-mind-matter-mathematics/.
18 John Hedley Brooke, "Science and Theology in the Enlightenment," in Religion and Science: History,
Method, Dialogue, ed. W. Mark Richardson and Wesley J. Wildman (Oxford, UK: Routledge, 1996), 8.
19 Keas, The Myth of Science vs. Religion, 21.
20 Polkinghorne, The Faith of a Physicist, 3-4.
2 Bruce L. Gordon, "Divine Action and the World of Science: What Cosmology and Quantum Physics Teach
Us about the Role of Providence in Nature," Journal of Biblical and Theological Studies, 2, no. 2 (2017): 289.
2 Stephen M. Barr, The Believing Scientist: Essays on Science and Religion (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans,
2016), 86.
23 Gordon, "Divine Action," 298.
24 Jeff Myers, Understanding the Faith: A Survey of Christian Apologetics (Colorado Springs, CO: David C.
Cook, 2016), 315.
25 Though variously attributed, this quote most likely originated with the writer Ray Cummings. See "Time
Is What Keeps Everything from Happening At Once," Quote Investigator, July 6, 2019, quoteinvestigator.
com/2019/07/06/time/.
26 "Physics of Time," Exactly What is Time?, accessed August 2, 2023, exactlywhatistime.com/physics-of-
time/.
27 Wayne Jackson, "The Biblical Concept of "Time'," Christian Courier, accessed August 2, 2023,
christiancourier.com/articles/the-biblical-concept-of-time.
28 Stephen C. Meyer, Signature in the Cell: Intelligent Design and the DNA Enigma (Lafayette, IN: Ratio
Christi Press, 2023), 4.
29 Meyer, Signature in the Cell, 6.
30 Jeff Myers comments, "The Miller-Urey experiments intended to simulate lighting striking the gasses in
the early earth's atmosphere. After running the experiments and letting the chemical products sit for a period
of time, Miller discovered that amino acids—the building blocks of proteins—had been produced ....
However, it has also been known for decades that the Earth's early atmosphere was fundamentally different
from the gasses used by Miller and Urey." Understanding the Faith, 311.
31 George M. Whitesides, "Revolution in Chemistry; Priestley Medalist George M. Whitesides' Address,"
Chemical and Engineering News 85 (March 26, 2007): 12-17.
32 Meyer, Signature in the Cell, 14.
33 You can find more information about the four views listed below at the following websites:
answersingenesis.org (young earth creationism), reasons.org (old earth creationism), discovery.org (intelligent
design), and biologos.org (theistic evolution/evolutionary creationism).
34 Reasons to Believe, reasons.org
35 The Discovery Institute, discovery.org
36 BioLogos, biologos.org
37 J. P. Moreland, Finding Quiet: My Story of Overcoming Anxiety and the Practices That Brought Peace (Grand
Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2019), 31.
361. P. Moreland, What Is the Soul? Recovering Human Personhood in a Scientific Age (Lafayette, IN: Ratio
Christi Press, 2021), 5-9.
3) See, for example, "The Origin of Human Life at Fertilization: Quotes Compiled from Medical Textbooks
and Peer-Reviewed Scientific Literature, accessed August 2, 2023, bdfund.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/05/
Condic-Sources-Embryology.pdf.
40 Steven Andrew Jacobs, "The Scientific Consensus on When a Human's Life Begins." Isues in Law o
Medicine 36, no. 2 (Fall 2021): 221-33.
41 Kristin Hugo, "Humans Could Be Frozen Alive and Thawed to Continue Living, Says Russian Company?"
Newsweek, November 13, 2017, newsweek.com/cryonics-freezing-people-russian-company-709999.
42 Tanya Lewis, "The Singularity Is Near: Mind Uploading by 2045.," Live Science, June 17, 2013,
livescience.com/37499-immortality-by-2045-conference.html.
43 Ben Keiser, "Thinking about Death in Tales From the Loop, " Summit Ministries, May 1, 2020, summit.org/
resources/reflect/tales-from-the-loop-death-afterlife/.
14 Mike Aquilina, "Modern Medicine Is Based on Christianity," St. Paul Center for Biblical Theology,
October 17, 2019, stpaulcenter.com/modern-medicine-is-based-on-christianityl.
45 See Gary B. Ferngren, Medicine and Health Care in Early Christianity (Baltimore, MD: John Hopkins
University Press, 2009).
4 Aquilina, "Modern Medicine."
47 For a thorough discussion of this issue, see Rennie B. Schoepflin, "Myth 14: That the Church Denounced
Anesthesia in Childbirth on Biblical Grounds," in Ronald L. Numbers, ed., Galileo Goes to Jail: And Other
Myths about Science and Religion (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2009), 123-30.
48 Timothy Larsen, "The War Is Over, If You Want It: Beyond the Conflict between Faith and Science,"
Perspectives on Science and Christian Faith 60, no. 3 (September 2008): 149.
49 For more on caring for mental health, see Moreland, Finding Quiet.
50 J. W. Haas, "John Wesley's Views on Science and Christianity: An Examination of the Charge of Antiscience,"
Church History 63, no. 3(1994): 378-92, doi.org/10.2307/3167535.
5' Haas, "John Wesley's Views on Science," 386.
52 Aleta Quinn, "William Whewell's Philosophy of Architecture and the Historicization of Biology," Studies
in History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences 59 (2016): 11-19, 14.
53 Quoted in a conversation with Michael Keas.
CHAPTER 12 | 207
206 | CHAPTER 12
S Christianity and Science
