# Chapter 18

<!-- page-1 (book p.18) -->

Conclusion
1. Scripture and the Mission of God
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to correlate Scripture's metanarrative to the
mission of God.
Over the last 17 chapters, we've surveyed the world of evangelism and apologetics. We've
considered their purpose, examined a Christ-like model of apologetics, and illustrated how
to address many different apologetic questions. In this final chapter, we'll briefly review
what we've learned in this book, emphasizing the place of evangelism and apologetics
within the great biblical story.
Let's begin with the Bible, the foundational document for all of
Christian life. It is the key to unlocking our role in the mission of God,
which is his grand plan to bless, redeem, and restore all creation. We
learned that Scripture is a true story for the whole world. It is a story
about God—what he has done, is doing, and will do. The Bible is God's
inspired and authoritative Word —his revelation to us, communicated
through human authors with the guidance of the Holy Spirit.
Scripture is true in all that it teaches. We can explore this claim by getting to know
the God revealed in Scripture and by investigating the external evidence for the Bibles
trustworthiness and reliability. The Bible is unique, presenting us with a universe created
and sustained by one God, sovereign over all creation. This picture is radically different
from the universe imagined by the polytheistic cultures of the biblical writers ancient
context. The external evidence also reveals that the Scriptures are historically reliable. The
canon of Scripture was carefully compiled as the church recognized the books God had
inspired as authoritative for believers. These books have been
passed down to us today with incredible accuracy.
If we are to read Scripture well, we need to come to it with
an open mind, a commitment to investigating its literary and
historical context, and a willingness to engage the biblical
authors in their own culture and environment. When we read
Scripture as a metanarrative, the overarching story makes sense
of everything. The Bible's metanarrative can be described in six
acts, with a crucial interlude. The story begins with creation,
where God makes a good world and fills it with light and life,
granting humans inherent dignity and calling them to rule well
over his world. Though this is frustrated by the fall, in which
humans rebel against God's rule, God never gives up on his
creation. He immediately initiates redemption by calling the
family of Abraham to be a blessing to the world. God's chosen
people, the nation of Israel, stumbled along as they tried to carry
out God's mission. The Old Testament ends with longing and
hope for restoration.
During the second temple period, this waiting continues until
Jesus arrives on the scene, proclaiming the kingdom of God and
teaching an extraordinary new way of living. Ultimately, Jesus
gives his life for the sake of the world and then rises from the
grave, defeating the powers of sin and death and making redemption available to all who
place their trust in him. Following Jesus'ascension, God calls the church, including us, to
participate in his mission by sharing the good news about Jesus in word and deed. Today,
we are not just passive observers but active participants in God's mission. This "mission of
God is as universal as the love of God," and extends from the care of creation to individual
humans and the nations themselves.! Because God loves the world, we seek to bring his
God the Creator,
St. Francis of
Assisi Church,
Krakow, Poland
CHAPTER 18 | 295


<!-- page-2 -->

healing love into every corner of creation (John 20:21). We follow the Spirit's lead as we
await the day when God will restore all of creation, bringing the destructive forces of evil to
an end and ushering us into the new heavens and earth where all things will be made new.
2. Participating in God's Mission with
Confidence and Joy
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to describe the ways Christians participate in
God's mission.
What does it look like to participate in God's mission? It's crucial to remember that our
participation is not about working to earn God's favor or to achieve salvation. Instead, it
is a response that we give freely out of the overflow of God's love for us. There are three
ways Christians are called to serve in God's mission. First, we are to be the people of God
in the place that we are, living in ways that show the beauty of the gospel. Second, we are
to demonstrate the love of Jesus through the things that we do in our communities. Third,
we are to tell the gospel message with words. These three ways of participating in God's
mission are especially relevant across four primary areas of Christian witness-evangelism,
discipleship, missions, and apologetics. In this book, we focused on apologetics, in which
Christians defend the faith against criticism, commend its transforming power, and
translate it so that others can understand what it is all about.
Training in apologetics helps Christians grow strong in faith and prepare for encounters
with non-Christians. Apologists need to prepare spiritually by recalling their identity in
Christ, repenting from sin, and praying for others. Intellectual preparation includes studying
Scripture, learning from wise people, and engaging with other perspectives. Apologists can
also prepare emotionally by assessing their feelings
and practicing authenticity. Yet, sharing with
others can be challenging even when one is well-
prepared. The good news is that the Holy Spirit
empowers us for this work. The motivation for our
witness is love. We love others because God first
loved us (1 John 4:19).
To be loving apologists, we consider how we
approach others with humility and willingness to
submit our understanding of the truth to Jesus
(1 Peter 3:15). We follow the Holy Spirit's lead
and so make space for others to encounter Jesus.
In our conversations, we seek not only to share
information but also to take an interest in others, listen, and be sensitive to the unique
dynamics of each situation. As we imitate Jesus in this way, we may be planters, waterers,
or reapers. But in the end, it is God who brings a person to salvation.
Using reason and logic, making sound and valid arguments, and thinking critically
are crucial aspects of apologetics. Apologetics requires the ability to discern between
arguments and assertions, thoughtful word use, carefully weighing sources, and focused
listening and question- asking. These practices help us detect logical fillacies in others
arguments and avoid using logical fallacies ourselves. Showing genuine interest in others
helps us be more precise and relevant in our arguments.
have confident knowledge without absolute
While even the best arguments cannot eliminate the possibility of doubt, we can
certainty. Uncertainty and doubt can arise
from numerous sources. Some uncertainty
is intellectual, such as when we lack proper
knowledge or when previously trusted
arguments prove inadequate. Doubt also arises
from our emotions when we lack confidence
or no longer feel God's presence. It may come
from experiences of anxiety, depression, or
trauma, or it may be generated by practical
atheism. Doubt, whatever its source, is not the
opposite of faith. When handled well, doubt
can stimulate growth in the Christian life.
When we examine its roots, pray about it, investigate questions for ourselves, learn to doubt
our doubts, and seek the company of others, God can work to bring about a more robust
faith in us.
We can participate in God's mission with confidence and joy as we embrace the
challenge of apologetics, study Scripture, prepare ourselves intellectually, spiritually, and
emotionally, take our doubts seriously, and trust the Holy Spirit.
3. Five Challenges to the Christian Faith
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to examine five foundational questions about
truth, religion, and science.
We will likely face challenging questions as we share the gospel's good news with others.
If the questions remain unanswered, they can become roadblocks on a person's journey
toward faith. In this section and the next, let's briefly review some of the most common
challenges to Christianity and some responses Christians can offer.
Is claiming truth intolerant? In Chapter 8, we considered the nature of truch. A Christian
view of truth begins with Jesus, who is himself the way, the truth, and the life (John 14:6.
God has revealed truth in his world through general and special revelation and invites us
to use all our faculties in the pursuit of truth (Proverbs 47, 23:23). Our beliefs should be
based on evidence and correspond with the way the world is. This view of truth stands
against modernism, the view that only reason and science reveal truth; postmodernism, the
view that humans cannot know truth; and relativism, the notion that all truth is relative to
the individual or culture.
CHAPTER 18 | 297
296 | CHAPTER 18
APOLOGETICS S


<!-- page-3 -->

Are all religions the same? In Chapter 9, we explored the religions of the world. The
reality of religious pluralism in modern society has led many people to believe that all
religions are basically the same. Yet this claim is neither accurate nor respectful to people
who hold religious beliefs. Because religions have many different and contradictory beliefs,
values, and practices, it is not logically possible for them all to be true. If there is to be true
tolerance, fruitful interreligious dialogue, and evangelism, we must try to understand what
other religions teach and what their adherents believe.
Is religion irrelevant? In Chapter 10, we focused on challenges to Christianity raised
by the nones—atheists, agnostics, and those who identify as nothing in particular. The
increasing prevalence of secularism, humanism, and individualism fuels the growth of
religious non-affiliation, and there are many popular misconceptions about religion. A
close examination of the evidence shows that religion is profoundly relevant to our lives
today. Here's why: worship is inherent to humanity. Christianity, with its metanarrative,
evidence, and truths that correspond to reality, provides the best and verifiably true
option. Worshipping the true God revealed in Christ is essential to a flourishing life. A
relationship with Christ is at the heart of the Christian religion (Acts 4:12, 1 Peter 3:18).
Is belief in the supernatural outdated? In Chapter 11, we considered evidence for the
supernatural. Three key arguments—the Kalam cosmological argument, the design
argument, and the moral argument—together form a powerful case for the existence of the
one Creator God revealed in Scripture. This God established the laws of nature, though
he sometimes miraculously transcends those laws to demonstrate his power and point us
to the coming restoration of all things. One of the most well-attested miracles in history is
the resurrection of Jesus (Romans 6:9), which is supported by five facts widely accepted by
scholars. The Bible also speaks of supernatural
beings like angels (Romans 8:38-39). Though
perhaps less easy to investigate than the reality of
miracles, there are good reasons to believe such
supernatural beings are still active today.
Is Christianity anti-science? In Chapter
12, we looked at the relationship between
Christianity and science. Contrary to popular
belief, Christianity and science are not at war but
can be allies in the quest for truth. Christianity
provides the foundational truths that allow
science to flourish. Many of the pioneers of
science were motivated by theistic beliefs.
Historically, theological reflection has aided
science in fields like cosmology, biology, origins, and psychology. The actual conflict is not
between Christianity and science but between Christianity and scientism. If we are open
to following the evidence wherever it leads, we will find that Christianity and science work
together for the benefit of everyone.
4. Four More Challenges to the Christian Faith
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to respond to four challenges to the Christian
faith.
Why do evil and suffering exist? In Chapter 13, we faced the challenge of evil and
suffering. Evil is that which deviates from the good, and it falls into two categories:
moral and natural. While some believe the existence of God is impossible or improbable
given the existence of evil, such claims are ridden with faulty assumprions. God did not
create evil. He may allow evil and suffering not to violate human free will as doing so
would destroy the possibility of love. Natural evil is much more challenging to accept,
though reasonable explanations exist. Evil is not just a problem out there but one in every
human heart—we have all done evil.
God is sovereign and works through our
free choices (good or evil) to achieve
his divine purposes. In Christ, God
enters into our suffering, experiences
the consequences of evil, and ultimately
defeats evil on the cross.
What's the deal with hell? In Chapter
14, we examined the biblical doctrine
of hell-the place where all who reject
Christ spend eternity excluded from
God's presence. This doctrine can be a
significant barrier to those who want to
trust Jesus but perceive hell as overly harsh
and unjust. Throughout church history, Christians have understood the nature of hell in
different ways, though most have affirmed the traditional view known as eternal conscious
torment. Hell's primary purpose is to punish Satan and his demons. All who reject Christ's
payment for sin will also suffer the just punishment of sin in hell. Because God is loving,
righteous, and holy, he brings judgment on sin. Hell is freely chosen. God will not force
anyone to spend eternity with him. Though we must speak of hell, we must also leave
judgment to God, take evil seriously, and amplify the beauty of the gospel.
What does the Bible have to say about violence, slavery, and racism? In Chapter 15,
we addressed these difficult subjects in Scripture, noting the importance of distinguishing
between the descriptive and prescriptive. We also saw how God incrementally moved his
people closer to his ideal. For example, God put rules in place for Israel that improved the
lot of slaves relative to other cultures, and further biblical reaching undermines slavery and
racism in all its forms. God sometimes brings down violent judgment, but this is never
done in an arbitrary sense. Instead, because God is love, he does justice. Considering the
conquest of Canaan, we saw that genocide is neither what was commanded nor what was
CHAPTER 18 | 299
| CHAPTER 18
APOLOGETICS 5
9 Conclusion


<!-- page-4 -->

300 | CHAPTER 18
enacted. Scripture encourages us to be honest with God about our feelings of rage but also
instructs us to leave vengeance to God. Ultimately, God's primary way of dealing with evil
is through his long-suffering love. On the cross, Jesus defeated the powers of evil.
What does the Bible have to say about sex and gender? In Chapter 16, we examined the
Bible's view of sexuality and gender. God created our physical bodies and allowed us to
seek out relationship with others. Marriage
between one man and one woman is
the God-ordained context for sex, and
all believers are called to a life of sexual
integrity. This means thinking and acting
in ways that dignify our bodies, respect
other humans, and honor God's design.
Pornography, sex outside of marriage,
abusive sex in marriage, same-sex acts,
and transgenderism all fall outside of
God's intent for sexuality. We are called
to compassion and love for those who
struggle with these issues. We also considered temptation as a normal part of life in a
broken world; even Jesus was tempted but did not sin. As Christians, our temptations and
struggles do not determine our identity. Instead, we hold to our identity in Christ and
rely on the power of the Holy Spirit to repent of and resist sin. If we want to change the
conversation around these topics, we need to be intentional about how we listen to others
and how we speak about and express biblical sexuality and gender.
5. Engaging at the Worldview Level
• OBJECTIVE: You will be able to determine ways worldview affects behavior.
To some, the apologetic arguments presented throughout this book will be compelling.
To others, they will not. Consider how some people see evidence for design in nature,
though others simply do not. Or think about how some people have never questioned the
existence of God, though others find God's existence implausible. The evidence for design
or God's existence is widely available to anyone who wants to investigate it. So, how can
different people look at the same evidence and come to totally different conclusions about
it? The answer comes down to worldview.
As we learned in Chapter 1, a worldview is a pattern of ideas and beliefs that helps us
understand the world and guides our decisions and actions. A worldview is a way of seeing
the world. Consider a pair of glasses. Glasses help correct our vision so that we can see
more clearly. If you have the wrong prescription, your vision of the world will be distorted.
The right prescription, on the other hand, helps you see reality as it truly is. In the same
way, an accurate worldview allows you to see correctly and live in alignment with the way
the world actually is.
Everyone has a worldview. The tricky thing is that worldviews often exist below the
surface. Sometimes, we are not even aware of them. Nonetheless, they affect our whole
APOLOGETICS 5
lives— from the things we value to how we live. They help us answer some of the biggest
questions about life: "Who am I." "Why am I here?" and "What is the purpose of life?"
Thus, a worldview "represents a person's most fundamental beliefs and assumptions about
the universe, as well as their ultimate values and heart commitments."" The worldview
pyramid illustrates how this works.?
BEHAVIOR
VALUES
WORLDVIEW
Think of a worldview as the starting point from which people apply their view of life in
their decisions and actions.* The arrow on the left shows the way a worldview influences
values and, in turn, behavior. For example, a person whose worldview says that all humans
bear God's image should value the inherent dignity of all people. This value may lead
that person to behave in ways that fight against racism, abortion, or other dehumanizing
practices.
However, the process can also work the other way, as illustrated by the arrow on the
right. If a person consistently behaves in a particular way that is our of alignment with
his or her worldview, this may lead that person to alter his or her worldview. For example,
suppose a person who claims to be a Christian consistently lives in a way that is contrary
to God's commands. At some point, he or she may decide to discard Christian doctrine
and seek an alternative worldview that can justify such behavior.
Christians learn how to engage people on the worldview level because a person's
worldview will very often determine what evidence
he or she will accept. This means that in addition to
helping people examine the evidence for any particular
Christian belief, we also need to encourage them to
examine the plausibility of their worldview.
In the previous volume of this series, we explored
the Christian worldview. In this volume, we ve
considered how to share that worldview and how
it stands up under scrutiny. In the next volume,
we'll take a deeper plunge into how the Christian
worldview significantly impacts every area of life. We
will compare the Christian worldview to five other
CHAPTER 18 | 301


<!-- page-5 -->

worldviews—secularism, Marxism, postmodernism, Islam, and new spirituality—each of
which offers its own answers to life's biggest questions.
This volume has given you a glimpse of the Christian worldview's reasonableness,
integrity, and transforming nature. We pray that this encourages you to investigate the
Christian faith more fully for yourself and share it with others.
ENDNOTES - 18
' Christopher J. H. Wright, The Mission of God: Unlocking the Bible's Grand Narrative (Downers Grove, IL:
Inter Varsity Press, 2006), 393-96.
" James Anderson, "What's Your Worldview?," Ligonier Ministries, May 2, 2016, video, 00:19:57, youtube.
com/watch?v=I52mZTcYThA.
3 This chart has been adapted and modified from W. Gary Phillips, William E. Brown, and John Stonestreet,
Making Sense of Your World: A Biblical Worldview, 2nd ed. (Salem, WI: Sheffield Publishing, 2008), 8.
4 Phillips et. al., Making Sense of Your World, 8.
Appendices
Apostles Creed
[We] believe in God,
the Father almighty,
creator of heaven and earth.
[We] believe in Jesus Christ,
God's only Son, our Lord,
who was conceived by the Holy Spirit,
born of the Virgin Mary,
suffered under Pontius Pilate,
was crucified, died, and was buried;
he descended to the dead.
On the third day he rose again;
he ascended into heaven,
he is seated at the right hand of the Father,
and he will come again to judge the living and the dead.
[We] believe in the Holy Spirit,
the holy catholic [universal] church,
the communion of saints,
the forgiveness of sins,
the resurrection of the body,
and the life everlasting. AMEN.
APOSTLES CREED | 303
302 CHAPTER 18
APOLOGETICS 9
© Appendices
