# Chapter 4

<!-- page-1 (book p.79) -->

UNIT
CHAPTER 4 LEARNING OBJECTIVES
Students will be able to:
1. give examples how Secularism rewrites the story of civilization. [4.1-4.2]
2. describe how materialism shapes the Secularist narrative. [4.3]
3. give a brief background of the history of Secularism in America. [4.4]
4. explain the importance of the Humanist Manifesto to the rise of Secularism. [4.5]
5. identify where Secularism is influential today. [4.6]
6. discuss why Secularism is a religious worldview. [4.7]
7. give examples of how Secularism views and understands nature, and the role evolu-
tion plays in the worldview of Secularism. [4.8]
8. state the key sources of revelation for Secularism; what Secularism says about hu-
manity; what Secularism says is wrong with us; and what Secularism says about how
we should live. [4.9]
9. identify how Secularism views other worldviews. [4.10]
10. describe the role faith plays in the Secularist worldview. [4.11}


<!-- page-2 -->

CHAPTER 4
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. Can you summarize the Secularist worldview in a few sentences? [4.1]
Secularism is an atheistic and materialistic worldview that advocates for a society free
from the influence of religion. It believes Western civilization owes its best aspects to
secularism and its worst faults to Christianity.
Chapter 4.1 Activity
THE BATTLE OF IDEAS: THE BATTLE OF STORIES
Objective: Students will fill out a KWL chart and research an example of a true story or
testimony that changed their opinionn on a topic or problem.
• Time Required: 60-80 minutes (two class periods)
1. Start the lesson with students making a KWL chart (refer to activity 3.1). Have students write
the letters K, W, L at the top of their paper. Direct them to list below the first two letters
what they already know about Secularism and what they want to learn about Secularism.
Collect the papers and use them as your guide for discussions on topics the students desire
to understand better.
2. Prepare to show clips or the entire movie Amazing Grace to see how and why William Wil-
berforce used truths gathered from slaves and people who had been on slave ships as a
means to abolish slavery.
3. Ask students why the truth was more effective than false stories from the slave traders.
4. Have students research and write a paragraph citing a current topic or news story that used true
stories or testimonies from people to expose and end a wrong practice or situation.
2. What is propaganda and how is it used in promoting worldviews? [4.2]
Propaganda is mass suggestion or influence with the goal of having the recipients vol-
untarily accept its position as if it were their own. Propaganda is biased and misleading
information disseminated to influence action toward a particular position or cause.
Propaganda uses extreme language and outright lies to caricature the opposition. It
portrays its opponents as evil to incite feelings of indignation and revulsion so that they
are seen as deserving of how they are treated.
- X0-
CHAPTER 4 DISCUSSION QUESTION:
Secularist propaganda blames Christianity for everything from the collapse of the Roman
Empire to the Dark Ages, from slavery in the New World to bigotry in America.
Chapter 4.2 Activity
SECULARISM: REWRITING THE STORY OF CIVILIZATION
Objective: Students will research an example of propaganda used by Nazis or communists
and also look for modern examples of propaganda.
1. Discuss the definition of the word propaganda. The previous section, 4.1, mentioned that the
Nazis and communist leaders used propaganda to further their causes. Have students do an
online search to find an example of propaganda used by the Nazis or communist leaders.
2. Direct students to share their findings with the class.
3. Ask students if they feel propaganda is prevalent today. Guide students to consider the vari-
ous areas where propaganda might appear: political mailings, television advertisements,
newspapers, etc.
4. Create a list on the board of current propaganda. Compare the items on the list to the ex-
amples of propaganda from the Nazis and communist leaders. Ask students to draw conclu-
sions about the use of propaganda throughout time-starting with Satan and the propa-
ganda he told Eve.
3. Can you give a few examples of Secularist propaganda in America and how it seeks
to influence public opinion? [4.2]
Gay marriage: To oppose gay marriage is seen as bigotry and discrimination. In spite
of the historical and almost universal definition of marriage, or any sound arguments
against same-sex unions, opposition today is cast as is backward and ignorant. Accep-
tance is enlightened and civilized.
Rewriting American history: Our history is being recast to put secular humanists in
the starring roles and to paint Christians as bit players and villains. The most popular


<!-- page-3 -->

college history text in print today, A People's History of the United States, is a 768-page
diatribe promoting this point of view.
4. In your own schooling, have you run into instances of Christianity being marginalized
or portrayed as evil? [4.2]
[Ask a few students to share their stories. As a teacher, can you share any professional
experiences of your faith being belittled or of having restrictions put on what you can say
in the classroom?]
5. Every worldview has its own version of the human story. What's the narrative of
Secularism? [4.3]
The word "secular" is from a Latin root meaning "worldly" or "temporal" If something
is secular, then it is separate from religion. Secularists believe that all aspects of public
life must be based on materialism-the idea that only the physical world exists. They
insist that government and educational institutions be free from religion, i.e., secular.
Secularism rejects the spiritual and the supernatural. It replaces theology with science
and sees itself as scientific, logical, and unbiased. This life is all there is. We have to make
the most of the here and now because there is no hereafter. No God created humans or
gave moral guidelines for our behavior. We have no one to whom we must give account
after death. Humans are their own moral standard and we are constantly evolving and
getting better.
6. What are the main tenants of Secularism? [4.3]
1. Self-sufficiency: no spiritual or transcendent influences or deities. Human beings
are all there is.
2. Materialism: only the physical world exists. No spiritual realm to influence the
"real" world.
Here and now: Secularists live for this world, not the next. There's no afterlife to
worry about.
4. Politically narrow: no room for religion in politics or theology in education.
7. Do Secularists and Christians agree about anything in American culture? [4.3]
Yes. Both are concerned about anti-intellectualism in popular culture. Americans are too
distracted by a dumbed-down media to reflect on critical ideas. If the general population
doesn't learn to spend more time unplugged, we could be headed for a new type of Dark Age.
During the past four decades, America's endemic anti-intellectual tendencies have
been grievously exacerbated by a new species of semiconscious anti-rationalism,
feeding on and fed by an ignorant popular culture of video images and unremitting
noise that leaves no room for contemplation or logic. (Susan Jacoby)
Chapter 4.3 Activity
THE SECULARIST NARRATIVE
Objective: Students will brainstorm a list of songs and movies that project Secularism.
• Materials Needed: paper and pencils or computers
• Time Required: 15-30 minutes
1. Discuss the Secularist narrative that shows its concern for the current age (as opposed to
eternity) and human beings (as opposed to God). Arrange the class in pairs.
2. Give 10 minutes for students to brainstorm a list of songs and movies that parallels the two
main aspects of Secularism. Have them write down specific lyrics or parts of movies that
prove their point.
3. Allow time for each pair to share their results with the class. Ask students if they think other
cultures might have fewer or more examples of Secularism in their songs and movies.
8. A few of America's Founding Fathers were deists. Who were they and what did they
believe? 4.4]
Thomas Jefferson and Benjamin Franklin were the most prominent deists. They believed
in the existence and morality of the Christian God, but did not believe in his miraculous,
direct involvement in the world or in doctrines they considered divisive, such as the
Trinity. They were more interested in civic religion than saving faith. They were pluralistic
and insisted on freedom of religion as opposed to a state religion enforced upon all.
What is the Humanist Manifesto and what impact has it had on America? [4.5]
Written in the 1930s by a group of atheist and agnostic professors-
-including John
Dewey, considered to be the father of American public education-the Manifesto's goal
was to develop a new religious movement based on science to replace the dogmatic "old
attitudes" promoted by theistic religions like Christianity.
The Manifesto was updated in 1973 and signed by hundreds of prominent scholars,
including Francis Crick, early pioneer in DNA research, and famed psychologist B. F.


<!-- page-4 (book p.85) -->

Skinner. The signers agreed to focus their work on the "needs of this age" (Secularism)
and on advancing humanity rather than concern with God (humanism). They described
themselves as Secular Humanists.
Christian pastors and professors fought back, seeing the manifestos as an attempt to
impose secular humanist ideas on the institutions of power, particularly the courts and
universities. Today, Secularists are quick to deflect such criticism by downplaying the
authority of these controversial statements.
Chapter 4.5 Activity
THE RISE OF SECULARISM
Objective: Students will research and present their findings on Secular Humanism.
• Materials Needed: computers
• Time Required: 15-30 minutes
1. Arrange students in small groups to research online. Designate half of the groups to re-
search and use only Christian-based or authored websites. The other half of the groups are
to use non-Christian sites to find the answers to these questions: (a) What does Secular
Humanism mean? (b) In what country is Secular Humanism most prevalent? (c) Where is it
least prevalent? (d) Who are prominent Secular Humanists? (e) What/who are their targets?
(f) What is the most important thing to know about Secular Humanism? (g) Why should
people care about Secular Humanism?
2. While students work, circulate around the room and help them determine if the websites
they are viewing are Christian or not.
3. After groups have completed their research or time is up, have a class discussion about their
findings.
4. Compare the information from the Christian websites versus the non-Christian sites. Ask
students what they can conclude about Secular Humanism based on these findings. Use
these findings to highlight the importance of knowing about the website and the world-
view of the website authors.
UNIT 4.
10. What percentage of Americans are Secularists? [4.6]
David Niose, president of the American Humanist Association, believes 12 to 18 percent
of Americans are Secularists. And the Pew Research Center found that one-third of
eighteen to twenty-nine-year-olds claims no religious affiliation.
11. How much influence do Secularists have on college campuses? [4.6]
Secularists can be found at nearly all of America's more than three thousand colleges and
universities. Surprisingly, they are more prominent in the humanities and social sciences
than in the biological or physical sciences.
How many professors claim a Secularist worldview? Of the 1,417 professors queried in a
2006 study called "Politics of the American Professoriate Survey, 22.9 percent said they
either didn't believe in God (atheist) or didn't know whether there is a God (agnostic).
By contrast, 34.9 percent said they know God exists.
The level of belief in God among professors was highest in accounting and elementary
education but lowest in psychology and mechanical engineering. The only places in the
university not controlled by Secularists, according to the study, were in the health and
agriculture departments.
12. Given these findings, what can you expect as a Christian heading off to college? [4.6]
You are guaranteed to encounter Secularists and will find very few professors who share
your faith in God, in Jesus, in the truth of the Bible, and in the relevance of faith to
culture. But to be forewarned is to be forearmed. Prepare yourself "to make a defense to
anyone who asks you for a reason for the hope that is in you; yet do it with gentleness
and respect" (1 Pet. 3:15).
Start Mon /15
13. Why is it accurate to call Secularism a religious worldview? [4.7]
Secularism is a way of seeing the world without appealing to God, which leads most
Secularists to say, "I don't believe in God, therefore I don't have a religious worldview."
But a worldview is "a pattern of ideas, beliefs, convictions, and habits that help us make
sense of God, the world, and our relationship to God and the world."
Secularists definitely have a pattern of ideas, beliefs, convictions, and habits.
[Secularism] consists in a new shape to the experience which prompts to and is
defined by belief; in a new context in which all searching and questioning about
the moral and spiritual must proceed. (Charles Taylor)
[Secularism affects] the totality of cultural life and ideation ... in a variety of areas
such as the arts, philosophy, and literature. (Hunter Baker)


<!-- page-5 (book p.87) -->

Secularism is a materialistic cultural system using powerful ideas to foster action and
influence its members to focus on collective ideals with missionary zeal. By this criterion,
Secularism is a religion, just one that denies the supernatural.
Among other things, a religion is a comprehensive set of beliefs about the cause, nature,
and purpose of the universe. Even though secularism denies the existence of God, it
still has a theology and its own answers to questions like "Why we are here?" and "How
we should live?"
Chapter 4.7 Activity
Is SECULARISM ACTUALLY A WORLDVIEW?
Objective: Students will participate in a mini debate about whether Secularism is a world-
view or a religion.
1. Divide the class into two groups. Assign each group one side of the debate to present:
Secularism is a worldview or Secularism is a religion.
2. Allow students time to research online to find more information and quotes to use in build-
ing their argument. Have them decide who will present which facts and who will respond
to the opposing team. Depending on the size of your class you may want to adjust the for-
mat and set three minute time limits to present, take questions from the opposition, answer
the questions, and make a closing statement. Determine at the outset and announce the
class time allocated to debate preparation and then when the debate will be held.
3. After the debate, have students determine whether they view Secularism as a worldview or
a religion. Discuss which arguments presented compelled students to choose their position.
- 3h -
14. Can science and religion coexist in Secularism? [4.8]
No, they are mutually exclusive. The Secularist sees religion as based on superstition
and ignorance whereas science is the systematic, impartial application of reason and
intelligence. Science is the only sure way of knowing in Secularism. There's no room for
a supernatural explanations for any event, including the origin of life. Creationism is
rejected in favor of evolution. Naturalism explains everything.
Modern science must rule out special creation or divine guidance. (Julian Huxley)
Materialism is absolute, for we cannot allow a Divine Foot in the door. (Richard
Lewontin)
A scientific humanist ... is someone who suggests that everything in the universe
has a material basis. And that means everything, including the mind and all its
spiritual products. (E. O. Wilson)
15. Why does Secularism rule out creation and rely on evolution? [4.8]
The scientific method requires that something be observable or measurable in order to
be real. One-time events, such as the creation of life, can't be repeated, observed, tested,
or falsified, and so can't be scientifically verified. Divine creation is relegated to the realm
of mythology and legend, to be replaced by scientific "facts."
Even though Charles Darwin allowed for the possibility of a supernatural force to explain
the appearance of life, the Secularist can't afford such a concession. Evolution is the
necessary foundation for so much more than biology. It is taught as fact, not theory.
Evolution has ramifications for ethics, sociology, law, and politics. Secularists believe
that evolutionary theory grounds a proper understanding of the world.
Evolution is a religion. This was true of evolution in the beginning, and it is true
of evolution still today. Evolution, therefore, came into being as a kind of secular
ideology an explicit substitute for Christianity. It stressed laws against miracles and,
by analogy, it promoted progress aganst providence. (Michael Ruse)
As in the chapters on other worldviews, let's see if we can understand Secularism better
by answering five questions:
• On what sources of revelation do Secularists draw?
• What does Secularism say about humanity?
• What does Secularism say is wrong with us?
• What does Secularism say about how we should live?
• How are we to understand other worldviews from the viewpoint of Secularism?


<!-- page-6 (book p.89) -->

16. To what sources do Secularists look for insight and inspiration? [4.9]
The classic champions of Secularism include the following:
• Thomas Paine, Age of Reason
• Charles Darwin, Origin of Species
• Friedrich Nietzsche, Genealogy of Morals
• Sigmund Freud, Civilization and Its Discontents
• John Dewey, Democracy and Education
• Bertrand Russell, Why I Am Not a Christian
• Simone de Beauvoir, The Second Sex
• Abraham Maslow, Toward a Psychology of Being
The most influential "New Atheists" are:
• Richard Dawkins
• Sam Harris
• Daniel Dennett
• Christopher Hitchens
The various humanist manifestos referred to earlier also serve as a source of truth and
helpful guidance to Secularists.
17. What does Secularism say about humanity? [4.9]
Secularists believe humans are evolving animals, continually progressing toward bio-
logical and social perfection. They also believe we are capable of controlling our own
evolutionary development. Secularists do not believe we are made in the image of God.
Nor do they believe in the existence of a spirit or soul that survives physical death. Matter
is all there is. What we perceive of as soul or mind is just electrical activity in the brain.
This is known as "mind/body monism."
One aspect of monism is that the human mind is still evolving and a more efficient model
is on the way. We could be headed for the age of "transhumanism." Victor ). Stenger,
among others, foresees computers becoming the next link in the evolutionary chain.
"Future computers will not only be superior to people in every task, mental or physical,
but will also be immortal."
Stenger believes we will eventually be able to save human consciousness in computer
memory and program computers with the full range of human thought. "If the computer
is "just a machine, so is the human brain. Perhaps, as part of this new consciousness, we
will become God."
18. What does Secularism say is wrong with us? [4.9]
The problem with humanity, according to Secularists, is an irrational belief in spiritual
things. Secularists think reality is an evolutionary pattern that progresses upward step
by step. History is the story of development from nonlife to life, simple to complex,
unintelligent to intelligent, animal to human, amoral to moral. With each successive
generation, we become more fit for survival.
What keeps humanity from reaching its full potential is religious people. Such folks are
viewed as psychologically deluded:
It's no secret that a major cause of this regression is the Religious Right, the loose-
knit but powerful movement that has been changing the dynamics of American
politics for over three decades. Guised as representing 'traditional family values,
the Religious Right is driven by a small minority that is extreme in its views, well-
funded, organized, and fueled by a fear of modernity that unfortunately resonates
on a mass level. (David Niose)
19. What does Secularism say about how we should live? [4.9]
Secularism denies an absolute moral code that must be obeyed. God's commands, tra-
ditionally understood to be the basis for absolute moral order, are nothing but harmful
fiction. Morality is biological, not theological.
Moral behavior of a rudimentary type is found in the higher animals and can be
traced even to lower forms of life. This fact is enough to establish that the source
of morality is biological and not theological. (V. M. Tarkunde)
Morality is based on natural law and should evolve along with the species. Julian Wadleigh
says, "It is not a set of precise rules but a guide that must be followed using plain com-
mon sense." Secularists believe we can rely on common sense because human beings
are inherently good.
20. How does Secularism relate to New Spirituality? [4.10]
Secularists dismiss it. To them, any reference to the spiritual or supernatural is ignorant
or superstitious. The notion that there are supernatural principles or spiritual powers at
work in the world is absurd and Secularists oppose anyone who believes such nonsense.
This includes everyone from Billy Graham and Mother Teresa to the Dalai Lama and
Oprah Winfrey, regardless of the impact of their lives.
21. How does Secularism relate to Marxism? [4.10]
Secularism and Marxism share a belief in materialism. They concur that the physical world
is all there is. They have similar assumptions about nature and humanity and a common
disdain for supernatural religion. Where they disagree is on the principle of freedom.
Secularists tend to believe a secular state will lead to the greatest freedom for the greatest
number of people. Marxists believe the principle of freedom is a tool used by those in
power to oppress workers. Secularists want religion to go away, but they recoil at how
Marxists have tried to destroy it through brute force. They abhor Marxist cruelty, but
they have no ethical foundation on which to correct it.


<!-- page-7 -->

Chapter 4.10 Activity
HOW ARE WE TO UNDERSTAND OTHER WORLDVIEWS
BASED ON SECULARISM?
Objective: Students will give a presentation showing how Secularism views New Spiritu-
ality, Marxism, Christianity and Islam, and Postmodernism.
• Materials Needed: computer, poster board and art supplies
1. Discuss with students the ways they could use their talents and creativity to commu-
nicate how Secularism views other worldviews. Direct students to decide on a type of
presentation, such as song, poem, slide presentation, poster, or skit.
2. Allow them to find a partner or work alone to show a Secularist's view of New Spiritual-
ity, Marxism, Christianity and Islam, and Postmodernism. Give time to plan and prepare
the presentations.
3. Let each student or student pair present. Discuss the presentations and encourage stu-
dents' creativity.
22. How does Secularism relate to Christianity and Islam? [4.10]
These monotheistic worldviews insist on a creator God, which makes them unacceptable
to Secularists. However, they also realize some Christians and Muslims are more secular
than spiritual. These folks are seen as allies, as long as they give up being guided by the
supernatural in their public actions.
Secularism cannot tolerate religious groups that are otherworldly in radical ways.
The most dangerous proponents of faith are those who abhor the saeculum [secular
age], who view it as incorrigibly corrupt, sinful, and carnal. Their hatred of the
present world leads them to hasten their (and our) promotion to the next. A lead-
ing and troubling indicator of an anti-secular worldview is an exaggerated concern
with one's fate after death. (Jacques Berlinerblau)
23. How does Secularism relate to Postmodernism? [4.10]
While Secularism maintains faith in science and reason, Postmodernism rejects all
worldviews that claim special access to the truth. Postmodernists see scientific dogmas
and statements as containing cultural and personal agendas that prevent people from
knowing reality whereas Secularists believe science reveals objective truth.
24. What role does faith play in Secularism? [4.11]
Secularists have complete faith in the scientific method, naturalistic evolution, and
materialism. They have faith in their own minds because they are not deluded by religious
views or convictions. They accept evolution without question, even though it is a theory
with many holes and unanswered questions. They have faith that science will eventually
fill in all the blanks. Although they have no sound theory or way to replicate the beginning
of the universe, Secularists have faith that it was not created by God.
Regardless of their dislike for the concept, Secularists have just as much need for faith
as any followers of theistic religions.
25. What are some realities for which Secularism has no good answers?
The beginning of the universe and life in the first place:
Modern science is based on the principle: "Give us one free miracle and we'll ex-
plain the rest." The one free miracle is the appearance of all the mass and energy in
the universe and all the laws that govern it in a single instant from nothing. (The
Importance of Human Beings, Terence Mckenna)
It is prima facie highly implausible that life as we know it is the result of a sequence
of physical accidents together with the mechanism of natural selection. ... If evolu-
tionary biology is a physical theory—as it is generally taken to be-then it cannot
account for the appearance of consciousness and of other phenomena that are not
physically reducible. (Mind and Cosmos, Thomas Nagel)
The creative process in evolution:
They [materialists] are tied up in a way of looking at the world which starts not
from observation but from dogma. ... What we see is a variety of organisms amaz-
ingly well adapted to their environment. We see in evolution an amazingly creative
process. Their philosophy says this is just chance and natural selection. But there
are other evolutionary philosophers who say, "Okay, natural selection plays a part,
it weeds out unfit organisms. But the creative process in evolution is a mystery.?"
(Cambridge biologist Rupert Sheldrake)


<!-- page-8 (book p.93) -->

"HUMANIST MANIFESTO" READING
In the 1930s, a group of atheist and agnostic professors wrote and signed a document called
the Humanist Manifesto to give voice to a new movement that became known as Secular
Humanism. Humanism sought to respect humanity and to make the world a better place by
encouraging people to contribute to society. Two of their major premises are the denial of
the supernatural and the rejection of religions as outdated and irrelevant.
As you read through the manifesto, compare its doctrines to those in the Bible. Think about
how humans derive purpose from God in Christianity and contrast it to how humanists
derive purpose from themselves.
To access this reading, go to www.summitu.com/utt and enter
the passcode found in the back of your manual.
"HUMANIST MANIFESTO" DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. 3.
What factors prompted the writing of the Humanist Manifesto?
More than thirty intellectuals decided that scientific and economic advances had changed
the world so much that it was time for a new understanding of humanity, since old
religious beliefs and worldviews were no longer adequate.
The increase in knowledge during the twentieth century made traditional religious
beliefs and doctrines outmoded and unable to deal with the complexities of modern life.
There is great danger of a final, and we believe fatal, identification of the word reli-
gion with doctrines and methods which have lost their significance and which are
powerless to solve the problem of human living in the Twentieth Century. Religions
have always been means for realizing the highest values of life.
Was the Humanist Manifesto meant to be a religious statement or a nonreligious
statement?
The Humanist Manifesto was a religious statement:
While this age does owe a vast debt to the traditional religions, it is none the less
obvious that any religion that can hope to be a synthesizing and dynamic force
for today must be shaped for the needs of this age. To establish such a religion is a
major necessity of the present. It is a responsibility which rests upon this generation.
(italics added for emphasis)
The religion was Secular Humanism and it was meant to replace traditional theistic
religions. Although it was atheistic, it was still very much a religion and its proponents
wanted it to be regarded as such.
How do the major doctrines of Secular Humanism differ from the foundational
doctrines of orthodox Christianity?
Theology:
• Secular Humanism believes the universe was not created and is self-existing.
• Christianity believes in a personal creator who is the author and sustainer of the
universe.
Humanity:
• Secular Humanism believes humans are the product of random evolutionary
processes.
• Christianity believes humans are made in the image of God.


<!-- page-9 (book p.95) -->

"HUMANIST MANIFESTO" DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
Spirit:
• Secular Humanism believes humans are only physical beings and what we perceive
as soul or spirit is just a function of the brain.
• Christianity believes humans have a physical body and immaterial spirit, which
is eternal.
4. How does Secular Humanism view religion? Does it allow for divine revelation of
any sort?
According to the Humanist Manifesto, all religion is man-made:
Humanism recognizes that man's religious culture and civilization, as clearly depicted
by anthropology and history, are the product of a gradual development due to his
interaction with his natural environment and with his social heritage.
Claims that the Bible or Quran are divinely inspired are rejected out of hand, not based
on evidence but on the a priori assumption there is nothing beyond physical reality.
Secular Humanism says we need to accept that religion is man-made and remake it
in keeping with the latest scientific understanding of the world. Science has replaced
revelation and man has replaced God in this new religion.
We are convinced that the time has passed for theism, deism, modernism, and the
several varieties of "new thought."
5. What type of society does the Humanist Manifesto promote?
The Humanist Manifesto is blatantly socialistic and communistic and this document
played a large part in advancing these political ideologies in the twentieth century.
The humanists are firmly convinced that existing acquisitive and profit-motivated
society has shown itself to be inadequate and that a radical change in methods,
controls, and motives must be instituted. A socialized and cooperative economic
order must be established to the end that the equitable distribution of the means
of life be possible. The goal of humanism is a free and universal society in which
people voluntarily and intelligently cooperate for the common good. Humanists
demand a shared life in a shared world.
Rather than freeing up humanity and resulting in utopia, the socialism and communism
of the last century lead to the slaughter of millions and the subjugation of millions more.
"THE SECULAR WORLDVIEW" VIDEO
The secular worldview asks, "Is God relevant to life?" It answers no, because to a secu-
larist, if you can't see it, hear it, or feel it, it doesn't exist. In this lecture, Dr. Jeff Myers
outlines the three foundational assumptions of secularism:
1. "God belief" is irrelevant.
2. Human beings are good by nature.
3. Society and its institutions are responsible for the evil we do.
Myers goes on to briefly explain ten key secular beliefs: atheism; naturalism; moral
relativism; neo-Darwinian evolution; monism; nontraditional family, church, and state;
positive law; political liberalism; economic interventionism; and historical evolution.
To access this video, go to www.summitu.com/utt and enter the passcode found in the back
of your manual.


<!-- page-10 (book p.96) -->

"THE SECULAR WORLDVIEW" VIDEO OUTLINE
Is God relevant to the way we live? The secular worldview says no. The secular world-
view focuses on the here and now and holds that belief in God is irrelevant at best and
dangerous at worst.
The secular view of history holds that_
religion in general, and Christianity
in particular, is responsible for most of the misery and exploitation humans have suffered.
But this pessimistic view isn't supported by the facts; rather it shows a preexisting bias.
Key secular beliefs:
1. "God belief" is
irrelevant
_: Even if there is a deity, no deity will
save us; we must save ourselves.
2. Humans are
good
_ by nature: We have no innate bent toward evil.
We aren't inherently sinful; we are actually perfectible without any interference
from the divine.
3. Society
and its institutions are responsible for the evil we do:
If humans aren't evil, how can we create an evil society? Secularism teaches that
when our interests run into the interests of others, we damage each other.
What Secularism asserts in the ten areas comprising a worldview:
1. Theology-Atheism
2. Philosophy-_
Materialism
3. Ethics-Moral Relativism
4. Biology-Neo-Darwinism
5. Psychology-—
Monism
6. Sociology-Nontraditional Family and State
7. Law-Positive Law
8. Politics-Liberalism
9. Economics--
Interventionism
10. History-Historical Evolution
Video clip: The four-minute clip from the animated movie
Up
illustrates
the depth of the human story that secularism doesn't address. There is so much more to
us than can be explained by Secularism's materialistic worldview.
"THE SECULAR WORLDVIEW" DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
Does a Secularist have to be an atheist?
No. Secularism doesn't insist there is no God; it just asserts that even if God does exist,
he's irrelevant to this life. It also asserts that belief in God is irrelevant, if not dangerous.
Secularists assert that if anything, belief in God has caused far more harm than good.
They are "here and now" people; they live for this world, not the next. They believe no
deity will save us; we must save ourselves. Heaven and hell are what we make them here
on earth, not a future state.
2. How would you counter the Secularism's argument that people are good by nature
and are "perfectible" apart from God?
Secularism insists people aren't inherently evil. They don't believe in the sinfulness of
humans, but they can't point to instances where humanity has perfected itself. The most
atheistic societies have been the most lethal to their citizens (e.g., Hitler's Germany,
Stalin's Russia, Mao's China).
If evil doesn't come from the human heart, where does it come from? The secularist would
say it comes from society and its institutions. But society is nothing but a collection of
people, so the argument actually works against itself.
3. What role do God and religion play in the secularist view of history?
God and religion play a very negative role in the secular view of history. Secularists at-
tribute most of human backwardness and suffering to the irrational belief in God. They
insist that in the name of God, religious leaders have suppressed human ingenuity and
intelligence and perpetrated the most heinous deeds, while feathering their own nests.
Christianity in particular is blamed for everything from the fall of Rome to the Dark
Ages to the Crusades, the Inquisition, and witch trials. But this warped view of history
doesn't fit the facts. Christianity has done far more good than evil. Ask your students
to cite some examples (e.g., abolition of slavery, construction of hospitals and schools,
protection of human and civil rights, and prison reform).
4. Briefly define the positions held by the secular worldview-moral relativism, neo-
Darwinism, and materialism—and state how they are different from the Christian
worldview.
Moral relativism is the view that moral judgments are true or false only relative to some
particular standpoint (e.g., a historical period or a culture). No standpoint is uniquely
privileged over all others.
Christians believe there is an absolute standard of truth and moral law in the character
of God and the revelation he has given through nature and Scripture.
Neo-Darwinism is the theory of evolution as expounded by subsequent students of
Darwin, holding that natural selection accounts for evolution and denying the inheri-
tance of acquired characters.


<!-- page-11 (book p.98) -->

"THE SECULAR WORLDVIEW" DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
Christians believe creation is the work of an intelligent designer and while evolution
may play a part in the process, it does not explain the origin or ultimate purpose of life.
Materialism is the idea that only matter exists and that only science can discover the
nature of reality. There is no reality outside the natural world and everything can be
explained by natural processes.
Christians believe there is a spiritual realm as well as a material realm and that the two
interact. God speaks into the natural world, and humans live in both the spiritual and
natural worlds.
5. Why do you think Dr. Myers showed the clip from the movie Up? What did you get
out of it?
The clip summarizes the human condition in four minutes, without words. It shows the
lifelong love of the hero, focusing on his marriage and ending with his widowhood. Myers
says, "I don't know a film that is more emotionally rich and psychologically complex."
Even though the film is animated, it realistically depicts our deepest longings, fears, loves,
and losses. It tells a deeper story than the one secular humanism tells. Secularism doesn't
account for the richness of human experience, desires, and hopes. Christianity does.
CHAPTER 4 ASSIGNMENT
Chapter 4 Key Points
Key Questions:
1. What are the tenets of the
Secularist worldview?
Key Terms:
1. Materialism
2. Monism
3. Naturalism
4. Propaganda
5. Religion
6. Secular Humanism
7. Secularism*
8. Transhumanism
Key Players:
1. John Dewey
2. Sigmund Freud
3. Julian Huxley
4. Paul Kurtz
5. Corliss Lamont
6. Thomas Paine
7. Bertrand Russell
8. Roy Wood Sellars
Key Works:
1. Age of Reason, Thomas Paine
2. Democracy and Education, John Dewey
3. Civilization and Its Discontents, Sigmund Freud
4. Humanist Manifesto I, Roy Woods Sellars
5. Humanist Manifesto II, Paul Kurtz
6. Humanist Manifesto 2000, Paul Kurtz
7.On the Origin of Species, Charles Darwin
8. Why I Am Not a Christian, Bertrand Russell
Hello again!
Intramurals are getting pretty intense. We have competitions every weekend now. In fact, we
had three this past week! Plus homework is starting to really take its toll on me. I'm tired and sore,
both physically and mentally. I wish the weekend would hurry up and get here.
You remember Sarah, right? I told you about her a few weeks ago. She's pretty nice, but ever
since I told her I was a Christian, she finds opportunities to mock my beliefs. I know she's just joking,
but sometimes it seems hurtful. The other day in practice, I made a really bad shot. We had a shot to
take the lead, and I majorly blew it. Embarrassed, I joked, "Sorry guys! My fault. I'm a terrible human
being!" She laughed a little sarcastically and said, "The Bible says so, right?"I didnt really appreciate
her tone, but I also didn't want her to know that some of her comments bothered me.
After the game, I apologized for missing the shot. I told her that everyone makes mistakes. She
agreed, but she took issue with the Christian notion of sin. I didn't exactly see what that had to do
with intramurals, but she went there regardless. Before too long, she was addressing just about every
"superstition" that Christianity holds dear. I don't remember everything she said, but she went on and
on about the Dark Ages, the Crusades, and even the Salem witch trials. I think the gist of her point is
that religion is evil. I have never heard anyone talk about Christianity like that before. Sure, I was told
that I might meet some atheists in college, but this wasn't quite what I expected.
Sarah calls herself a "Secularist." I kind of know what it means to be "secular," but I don't think
I fully understand where Sarah is coming from. It just seems like she disbelieves everything I say. I
know there's gotta be more! Maybe you could help me out! You've been learning about different
worldviews in school. Have you learned anything about this stuff yet?
First off, what is a Secularist? I know Sarah doesn't believe in the Christian view of original sin,
so what does Secularism say about humanity? And what does it say is wrong with us,
if anything? And if she doesn't go to church or tithe or read the Bible, what exactly does she do?
What does Secularism say about how we should live? It makes my head hurt trying to figure
all this stuff out. I can't believe you are learning about this kind of thing in high school. It would be
great if you could help me!
I gotta go. My friends invited me to a pool tournament in the student center. I've been practicing,
but I just learned how to play last month!
Wish me luck!
-Doug
*Short answer or essay question on the exam
