<!-- page-33 -->

# What the Bible Is and Isn't

## 1. What the Bible Is Really All About

The Bible is the bestselling book in the world. It is printed (in part or in whole) in 2,800 languages worldwide.<sup>1</sup> On average, 85 percent of US households own a Bible; the average number of Bibles per household is 4.3.<sup>2</sup> Unfortunately, although the Bible is widely owned, it goes largely unstudied.

<!-- page-34 -->

- Barely one-quarter of adults (27 percent) are confident that Satan exists, even though this is a key teaching of the Bible and something Jesus taught.<sup>3</sup>

- 47 percent of American Christians strongly agree or agree somewhat that the Book of Mormon, the Quran, and the Bible all express the same spiritual truths.<sup>4</sup>

- 69 percent believe they are knowledgeable about the Bible, but 58 percent are unable to correctly identify its first five books.<sup>5</sup>

- 45 percent of adults in the United States strongly—but erroneously—believe that the Bible teaches that God helps those who help themselves.<sup>6</sup>

- 60 percent of Americans can't name five of the Ten Commandments.<sup>7</sup>

- Only 52 percent of young adults know it is false to say that Sodom and Gomorrah were married.<sup>8</sup>

- 50 percent of Americans, including Christians, can't name any of the four gospels.<sup>9</sup>

The United States may be one of the most religious nations in the West, but the American people are quite ignorant of things they ought to know about religion.<sup>10</sup>

If the majority of Christians don't know what the Bible says, we can be sure they also don't realize what the Bible is *for*. "It's a rule book," some say. "It's a love letter," we've heard, "from God to just us."

However, the Bible doesn't *look* like a rule book, an instruction manual, or a love letter. It looks like something else altogether. Recognizing what the Bible is will affect how we read it and whether we understand it. The introduction to *The Jesus Storybook Bible*, a children's book written by author Sally Lloyd-Jones, simply sets forth what the Bible is really all about.

> **Recognizing what the Bible is will affect how we read it and whether we understand it.**

> God wrote, "I love you"—he wrote it in the sky, and on the earth, and under the sea. He wrote his message everywhere! Because God created everything in his world to reflect him like a mirror—to show us what he is like, to help us know him, to make our hearts sing….
>
> And God put it into words, too, and wrote it in a book called "the Bible."
>
> Now, some people think the Bible is a book of rules, telling you what you should and shouldn't do. The Bible certainly does have some rules in it. They show you how life works best. But the Bible isn't mainly about you and what you should be doing. It's about God and what he has done.
>
> Other people think the Bible is a book of heroes, showing you people you should copy. The Bible does have some heroes in it, but (as you'll soon find out) most of the people in the Bible aren't heroes at all. They make some big mistakes (sometimes on purpose). They get afraid and run away. At times they are downright mean.

<!-- page-35 -->

> No, the Bible isn't a book of rules, or a book of heroes. The Bible is most of all a Story. It's an adventure story about a young Hero who comes from a far country to win back his lost treasure. It's a love story about a brave Prince who leaves his palace, his throne—everything—to rescue the one he loves. It's like the most wonderful of fairy tales that has come true in real life!
>
> You see, the best thing about this Story is—it's true.
>
> There are lots of stories in the Bible, but all the stories are telling one Big Story. The Story of how God loves his children and comes to rescue them.
>
> It takes the whole Bible to tell this Story. And at the center of the Story, there is a baby. Every Story in the Bible whispers his name. He is like the missing piece in a puzzle—the piece that makes all the other pieces fit together, and suddenly you can see a beautiful picture.<sup>11</sup>

The Bible is God's big story of the world and everyone in it. Being ignorant of the Bible is to miss the whole point of life itself! There are many complicated parts to the story, but as Lloyd-Jones points out, the plotline is simple enough for a child to understand: it's about Jesus.

There is another story worth knowing. There was a time when the Bible's influence was widespread, and everyone in the West was better off for it. This is another fascinating story in and of itself and one most people—even longtime believers—will find amazing. In this chapter, we'll explore this story. We'll discover what the Bible is and is not. Along the way, we'll take a look at concepts such as revelation, knowledge, and truth that can help us grasp the place of the Bible in our lives. If we're willing, we'll recover an understanding of why and how this one book—the Bible—changed the world.

> **We'll recover an understanding of why and how this one book—the Bible—changed the world.**

## 2. The Influence of the Bible

In his visit to America in the 1830s, French sociologist Alexis de Tocqueville discovered that "America is still the place where the Christian religion has kept the greatest real power over men's souls; and nothing better demonstrates how useful and natural it is to man, since the country where it now has widest sway is both the most enlightened and the freest."<sup>12</sup> If this was so, it was intentional. Here's what some of America's founders said about the Bible and Christianity:

- John Jay (the first chief justice of the Supreme Court) called the Bible the "best of Books" and told his daughter, "Do not omit reading in it daily; in it you will find the best rules for your Conduct in this life and the most elevated hopes for futurity."<sup>13</sup>

- Samuel Adams (founding father and Massachusetts governor): "The Rights of the Colonists as Christians may be best understood by reading and carefully studying the institutes of the great Law Giver and Head of the Christian Church, which are to be found clearly written and promulgated in the New Testament."<sup>14</sup>

<!-- page-36 -->

- Noah Webster (author of the famous dictionary): "All of the miseries and evils which men suffer from vice, crime, ambition, injustice, oppression, slavery, and war, proceed from them despising or neglecting the precepts contained in the Bible."<sup>15</sup>

- Benjamin Rush (medical doctor and founding father): "The Bible contains more knowledge necessary to man in his present state than any other book in the world."<sup>16</sup>

A remarkable number of US presidents through history have concurred:

- John Adams: "The Bible is the best book in the world."<sup>17</sup>

- John Quincy Adams: "No book in the world deserves to be so unceasingly studied and so profoundly meditated upon as the Bible."<sup>18</sup>

- Abraham Lincoln: "The Bible is the best gift God has given to men. All the good the Savior gave to the world was communicated through this book. But for it, we could not know right from wrong."<sup>19</sup>

- Theodore Roosevelt: "The teachings of the Bible are so interwoven and entwined with our whole civic and social life that it would be literally—I do not mean figuratively, I mean literally—impossible for us to figure to ourselves what that life would be if these teachings were removed."<sup>20</sup>

- Woodrow Wilson: "The Bible is the one supreme source of revelation of the meaning of life, the nature of God, and spiritual nature and needs of men. It is the only guide of life which really leads the spirit in the way of peace and salvation."<sup>21</sup>

- Calvin Coolidge: "The strength of our country is the strength of its religious convictions. The foundations of our society and our government rest so much on the teachings of the Bible that it would be difficult to support them if faith in these teachings would cease to be practically universal in our country."<sup>22</sup>

- Franklin Roosevelt: "We cannot read the history of our rise and development as a nation without reckoning with the place the Bible has occupied in shaping the advances of the Republic. I suggest a nationwide reading of the Holy Scriptures."<sup>23</sup>

- Harry Truman: "The fundamental basis of this Nation's law was given to Moses on the Mount. The fundamental basis of our Bill of Rights comes from the teachings of Moses and St. Matthew, from Isaiah and St. Paul. I don't think we emphasize that enough these days."<sup>24</sup>

- Ronald Reagan: "Of the many influences that have shaped the United States of America into a distinctive Nation and people, none may be said to be more fundamental and

<!-- page-37 -->

enduring than the Bible."<sup>25</sup>

Of course, not all these men were what we would today call evangelical Christians. Even so, the significance of the Bible to their way of thinking was so important that America's first English-language Bible included a recommendation by the United States Congress: "Resolved that the United States in Congress assembled … recommend this edition of the Bible to the inhabitants of the United States."<sup>26</sup> Clearly, America's founders saw the Bible as essential to the basis of a free society.

> **America's founders saw the Bible as essential to the basis of a free society.**

The preservation of freedom is only one of many reasons for studying the Bible. In his lecture "Why Should We Study the Bible?" David A. Noebel, Summit Ministries' founder, offers compelling reasons for why *everyone* should take the Bible seriously. Here are four of his key points:

1. **The Bible is part of world literature.** In *Bartlett's Book of Quotations*, there are more quotations from the Bible than from any other source. Even atheist Richard Dawkins, who abhors the Bible as a source of morality, wrote a startling editorial proclaiming that all children should read the Bible. Dawkins said, "A native speaker of English who has never read a word of the King James Bible is verging on the barbarian."<sup>27</sup>

2. **The Bible changed Western civilization.** Alvin Schmidt's *How Christianity Changed the World* says the Bible's moral guidance influenced everything, including the abolition of slavery, the banning of child molestation, freedom and dignity for women, the formation of hospitals and schools, the securing of liberty and justice for all, the advance of science, the development of great art and architecture, and the sanctity of human life.<sup>28</sup>

3. **Knowledge of the Bible is the mark of an educated person.** William Lyon Phelps, a Yale professor for forty-one years, wrote in *Human Nature in the Bible*, "Everyone who has a thorough knowledge of the Bible may truly be called educated; and no other learning or culture, no matter how extensive or elegant, can, among Europeans and Americans, form a proper substitute…. I believe a knowledge of the Bible without a college education is more valuable than a college course without the Bible."<sup>29</sup>

4. **Knowledge of the Bible is the mark of a moral person.** To live successfully in this world, a person must be able to distinguish between right and wrong, good and evil, and choose to do what is right and good. The famous Golden Rule of morality, "Do unto others what you would have them do unto you," comes directly from the Bible. (See Matthew 7:12 and also Mark 12:29–31, in which Jesus references the Old Testament passages of Exodus 3:6, Deuteronomy 6:4–5, and Leviticus 19:18.<sup>30</sup>) Even famed British atheist Bertrand Russell understood the principle when he said, "What the world needs is Christian love or compassion."<sup>31</sup>

So knowing the Bible is important. But exactly *how* do we come to know it?

## 3. The Bible's Unique Call to Study

<!-- page-38 -->

As Noebel points out, every worldview has a "Bible," a book of what we consider to be revealed truth. Muslims have the Quran, Secular Humanists have *The Humanist Manifesto*, Libertarians have *Atlas Shrugged*, Marxists have *The Communist Manifesto*, Hindus have the *Bhagavad Gita*. Among all others, the Bible is unique in its tremendous influence.

> **Every worldview has a "Bible."**

We come to know the Bible through careful study. The apostle Paul wrote to his protégé Timothy, "Do your best to present yourself to God as one approved, a worker who has no need to be ashamed, rightly handling the word of truth" (2 Tim. 2:15). Later in the same letter, he affirmed his own careful study with a request: "When you come, bring the cloak that I left with Carpus at Troas, also the books, and above all the parchments" (4:13). Even though Paul was an old man approaching his death, he intended to continue studying Scripture to his dying day.

The Bible encourages its readers to be deeply familiar with the Scriptures (Ps. 119) and not distort them (2 Pet. 3:16).<sup>32</sup> It applauds those who compared the apostle Paul's teachings to the Old Testament to see if they were true (Acts 17:1–4).<sup>33</sup> It is extraordinarily rare for a holy book to call for careful, rational examination of its own teachings to see if they are consistent with revealed truth. Nothing in the Quran, for example, says, "Check this out for yourself to see if the prophet Muhammad was correct" or "Study this to see if it is consistent with the rest of the Quran." In fact, Muhammad himself was told to consult the "people of the Book" (Christians and Jews) if he doubted that the message he was receiving from the angel Gabriel was correct.<sup>34</sup> Why? Because Christians and Jews had diligently studied the Bible (though, the Quran claims, to little effect).<sup>35</sup> As for the Quran, its message is much like the books of other religious worldviews: "Here it is, take it or leave it."<sup>36</sup>

> **In addition to calling for careful examination, the Bible promises several benefits to believers who engage in its study.**

In addition to calling for careful examination, the Bible promises several benefits to believers who engage in its study:

1. **Blessing:** Psalm 119 indicates that those who study Scripture will be blessed with delight, freedom from shame, wisdom, hope, and protection against doing evil.

2. **Insight into how to bear spiritual fruit:** "The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, gentleness, self-control; against such things there is no law" (Gal. 5:22–23).

3. **Freedom from spiritual bondage:** Understanding God is the basis of freedom. "Now the Lord is the Spirit, and where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is freedom…. But to tamper with God's word, but by the open statement of the truth we would commend ourselves to everyone's conscience in the sight of God" (2 Cor. 3:17–4:2).

<!-- page-39 -->

4. **Direction in life:** "Trust in the LORD with all your heart, and do not lean on your own understanding. In all your ways acknowledge him, and he will make straight your paths" (Prov. 3:5–6).

5. **The ability to grasp truth and defeat error:** "Though we walk in the flesh, we are not waging war according to the flesh. For the weapons of our warfare are not of the flesh but have divine power to destroy strongholds. We destroy arguments and every lofty opinion raised against the knowledge of God, and take every thought captive to obey Christ" (2 Cor. 10:3–5; see also Eph. 6:10–19).

> **We must first dispose of the common myth that the Bible is an "instruction manual" for life.**

Why does the Bible call for careful examination, and how is it possible that such examination will lead to a profound sense of freedom and direction in life? To answer these questions, we must have a clear understanding of the concept of revelation. In order to grasp the concept of revelation, though, we must first dispose of the common myth that the Bible is an "instruction manual" for life.

## 4. Not Merely a Book of Instructions

A common acronym from the 1990s said that the Bible stands for "Basic Instructions Before Leaving Earth." To this view, the Bible's value is that of a checklist. When my sons were small, we enjoyed assembling Lego sets. Just follow the pictures, snap the right pieces together in the correct order, and you'll end up with an airplane, a ship, or an epic scene from *The Lord of the Rings*.

What makes Lego instruction manuals valuable is their simplicity. Each instruction is stated as a command: "Do this next." As long as you follow each step correctly and in the right order, everything works out. There is no depth, no explanation of why things work as they do, no higher-level thinking skills required, and no connection to anything else in life.

But the Bible, the whole Bible, complete with stories and poems and wisdom and prophecy—not just rules—is not even primarily about us at all. It is about God and what he has done, is doing, and will do in the world and for all eternity. It is *from* God and *for* humans. Studying it orients us to the world God both created and redeemed. This allows us to live wisely. The Bible, then, is less like an instruction manual and more like a compass. Theologian N. T. Wright puts it this way:

> **[The Bible] is about God and what he has done, is doing, and will do in the world and for all eternity…. Studying it orients us to the world God both created and redeemed.**

> Reading scripture, like praying and sharing in the sacraments, is one of the means by which the life of heaven and the life of earth interlock. (This is what older writers were referring to when they spoke of "the means of grace." It isn't that we can control

<!-- page-40 -->

the glory of God, and the sky above proclaims his handiwork. Day to day pours out speech, and night to night reveals knowledge. There is no speech, nor are there words, whose voice is not heard. Their measuring line goes out through all the earth, and their words to the end of the world."

Chuck Colson, the founder of Prison Fellowship, which brought Bible-based reform to prisons all over the world, described in his book *Born Again* a particular experience he had as a marine captain leading a battalion to quell a communist rebellion in Guatemala. Shortly before the action commenced, Colson stood apprehensively on the deck of his ship staring at the stars:

> That night I suddenly became as certain as I had ever been about anything in my life that out there in that great starlit beyond was God. I was convinced that He ruled over the universe, that to Him there were no mysteries, that He somehow kept it all miraculously in order. In my own fumbling way, I prayed, knowing that He was there, questioning only whether He had time to hear me.<sup>43</sup>

Colson did not enter into a personal relationship with Jesus Christ at that moment, but his recognition of God's creation laid a foundation on which God would build, through godly mentors and twenty years in the future, to make himself completely known.

This kind of revelation (i.e., God showing himself in creation, revealing his existence to our hearts) is called **general revelation**. Bruce Demarest describes the content of what can be known through general revelation: "While not imparting truths necessary for salvation—such as the Trinity, the incarnation, or the atonement—general revelation conveys the conviction that God exists and that he is transcendent, immanent, self-sufficient, eternal, powerful, good and a hater of evil."<sup>44</sup>

> *General Revelation:* God's universal revelation about himself (Ps. 19:1–6; Rom. 1:18–20) and morality (2:14–15) that can be obtained through nature.

Like the unveiling of a famous painting, general revelation is a silent unveiling in which God's work speaks for itself. As I write this, an exhibit of Dutch Golden Age paintings is making its way across the United States for the first time in at least three decades. The most anticipated piece is probably Johannes Vermeer's *Girl with the Pearl Earring*. Imagine the scene as the opening night crowd gathers and the curator parts the curtain, revealing Vermeer's beloved work to many who are seeing it in person for the first time. A few people murmur their approval, but no one says a word. There is no need. This is the actual painting, the one lost on the crowd: this is the real thing, and everyone knows it.

Because God's general revelation is clear, ignorance of reality is no excuse. Romans 1:19–20 says, "What can be known about God is plain to them, because God has shown it to them. For his invisible attributes, namely, his eternal power and divine nature, have been clearly perceived, ever since the creation of the world, in the things that have been made. So they are without excuse."

General revelation is written on our hearts as well as in our observation of creation. Later in his letter to the Romans, the apostle Paul wrote,

<!-- page-42 -->

> When Gentiles, who do not have the law, by nature do what the law requires, they are a law to themselves, even though they do not have the law. They show that the work of the law is written on their hearts, while their conscience also bears witness, and their conflicting thoughts accuse or even excuse them on that day when, according to my gospel, God judges the secrets of men by Christ Jesus. (2:14–16)

But general revelation reveals God's work in only its broadest strokes. The finer details about what we need to be united with God in Christ fit into what theologians call **special revelation**. Christian theologian Millard J. Erickson says, "By special revelation we mean God's manifestation of himself to particular persons at definite times and places, enabling those persons to enter into a redemptive relationship with him."<sup>45</sup> Scripture speaks of this in Hebrews 1:1–2, which says, "Long ago, at many times and in many ways, God spoke to our fathers by the prophets, but in these last days he has spoken to us by his Son, whom he appointed the heir of all things, through whom also he created the world."

A few years ago I was privileged to attend an advanced screening of a movie called *Amazing Grace*, the story of William Wilberforce's battle to end the British slave trade. The director, writer, and producer were all on hand to introduce the movie and answer questions. The movie spoke for itself, but having the filmmakers present enabled us to receive special insight into how the movie was made, why it was made, and how we could help spread the word about it.

> *Special Revelation:* God's unique revelation about himself through the Scriptures (Ps. 19:7–11; 2 Tim. 3:14–17), miraculous events (dreams, visions, prophets, prophecy), and Jesus Christ (John 1:1–18).

Similarly, when we call Christianity a revealed religion, we are pointing out something more than the general existence of a creator-God. We are proclaiming God's special revelation through the Bible—like having spoken to the movie director himself!—which is knowable and true and thus has a legitimate claim to authority over our lives. As N. T. Wright puts it, "The authority of Scripture is the authority of God exercised through Scripture."<sup>46</sup> Most important, the Bible is essential to knowing God truly through Jesus Christ. All of this is involved when we say the Bible is God's Word, but what exactly this means and how we know it to be true requires closer examination.

## 7. What Does It Mean to Say the Bible Is "the Word of God"?

How do we know the Bible is God's Word? As you investigate the evidence, you will discover, as my friend Jonathan Morrow puts it, that "the Bible did not magically fall from heaven leather bound; its composition was a divine and human process consistent with the natural limitations associated with writing documents in the ancient world."<sup>47</sup>

So when we say the Bible is the revealed Word of God, we're making several claims:

- There is an external world that can be known.

- Truth about this world can be discovered.

- The Bible describes this world objectively, as it is for everyone.

<!-- page-43 -->

- The Bible makes claims that opens itself up for scrutiny and can thus be examined for truth.

Christians need to be prepared to understand and defend the Bible's "true truth" and not just how they feel about it. As author Nancy Pearcey phrases it, "When Christians are willing to reduce religion to noncognitive [feelings rather than thoughts] categories, unconnected to questions of truth or evidence, then we have already lost the battle."<sup>48</sup>

There is a growing confusion over what people mean when they say the Bible is God's Word. Some people say the Bible *contains* God's Word, which is a very different thing from saying it *is* God's Word. To say that the Bible merely contains God's Word implies that it contains some other things too. But who is to decide which parts of the Bible contain God's Word and which do not? Claiming that the Bible *contains* God's Word places the decision in human hands: God's Word is what *we* say it is.

> **There is a growing confusion over what people mean when they say the Bible is God's Word.**

Presumably, for people who hold this view, the Bible is God's Word only insofar as it rings true in our experience. Bluntly put, the compass of the Bible is God's Word only if it points to us. This is contrary to the whole point of biblical revelation. The traditional, historical argument for the Bible being God's Word acknowledges that the Bible's words ring true, but it clearly asserts that even if they didn't, the Bible itself is *still* true.

Following are some reasons to be confident that the Bible is God's Word.

**The Bible is rooted in history and has been accurately transmitted.** The Bible isn't just a random holy book proceeding from the imagination of a spiritual person. It is based on actual events in history. As philosopher William Lane Craig says,

> Christianity … is rooted in real events of history. To some people this is scandalous because it means that the truth of Christianity is inexplicably bound up with the truth of certain historical facts, such that if those facts should be disproved, so would Christianity. But at the same time, this makes Christianity unique because, unlike most other world religions, we now have a means of verifying its truth by historical evidence.<sup>49</sup>

From the beginning, those charged with transmitting God's Word through time sensed the need to conduct their work with great care. As we will see, the more that archaeologists examine the Bible's historical evidence, the more confirmation they find of its accuracy. The meticulous care with which scribes copied the text was seen in a special way with the 1947 discovery of the **Dead Sea Scrolls** in caves near Qumran in Israel. Among the documents was a stunning scroll containing nearly the complete text of the book of Isaiah nearly one thousand years older than the next oldest copy. In spite of the hundreds of times it must have been copied, between the old and the newer

> *Dead Sea Scrolls:* the oldest surviving collection of Jewish canonical texts written three hundred to four hundred years before the birth of Christ.

<!-- page-44 -->

versions there was a variation of less than 5 percent, most of which was spelling variations.<sup>50</sup> This is no secret: the amazing Isaiah scroll may be seen today at the Israel Museum in Jerusalem.

The accuracy of the New Testament is similarly demonstrated by manuscript evidence, the presence of early texts, the number of witnesses testifying to its truth, and archaeological discoveries confirming what the text actually says.<sup>51</sup> We'll look at some of this evidence in greater detail in coming chapters.

**The Bible is inspired by God.** Theologian David Clark says we must distinguish between our *recognition* of the Bible's authority and its *inherent possession* of authority. If we start by recognizing the Bible's truth and admit that our recognition is not what makes it true, we can respond with full confidence to the way its truths resonate in our lives. As Clark says, "The objective authority of the Bible rooted in God's inspiring action stands against allowing any contemporary agendas to gain control over the theology. The subjective recognition of the Bible as authoritative guards against a dead orthodoxy that pays lip service to divine truth even as it pursues other agendas."<sup>52</sup> In this statement, Clark uses the term *inspiring* not as a synonym for *motivational* but in its literal meaning, "to breathe." It is a reference to the Greek word *pneuma* used in 2 Timothy 3:16, which says, "All Scripture is *breathed out* by God and profitable for teaching, for reproof, for correction, and for training in righteousness."

There is also much confusion regarding what theologians mean when they talk about the inspiration of Scripture, and I certainly do not settle the matter with a few brief comments. At the very least, to say that God *inspired* the Bible means, according to Gordon Lewis, that "the Holy Spirit supernaturally motivated and superintended the prophetic and apostolic recipients of revelation in the entire process of writing their scriptural books."<sup>53</sup> Second Peter 1:20–21 says, "No prophecy of Scripture comes from someone's own interpretation. For no prophecy was ever produced by the will of man, but men spoke from God as they were carried along by the Holy Spirit." In fact, more than three thousand times the writers of the Bible claim to have received messages by the Holy Spirit.<sup>54</sup> In other words, the authors of the books of the Bible clearly believed they were led by God's Spirit to write what they did. The Holy Spirit "breathed into" (the literal meaning of *inspired*) God's intentions into their minds and hearts so that what they wrote accurately displayed his nature and character.

> **The authors of the books of the Bible clearly believed they were led by God's Spirit to write what they did.**

The product of the Holy Spirit's work is stunning: one completely coherent book made up of sixty-six separate books written over the course of fifteen hundred years by forty different writers. Some were kings and philosophers, yes, but others were fishermen and tentmakers. As biblical scholar Robert Saucy put it, "They lived in diverse cultures, and wrote in a variety of literary styles. But the message of the Bible is one great drama in which all of the parts fit together."<sup>55</sup>

**The Bible is inerrant.** Many theologians go beyond *inspiration* to say the Bible is inerrant (that is, without error). Theologian Carl F. H. Henry makes an extended argument about **inerrancy** in his six-volume work, *God,*

> *Inerrancy:* the doctrine that the Bible is without error.

<!-- page-45 -->

*Revelation, and Authority*. Henry clearly articulates what he means by inerrancy:

> The view that the Bible contains the Word of God but also comprises errors—historical, factual, or theological—reflects human fallibility while conveying the divine message, seems to me as logically precarious as the ancient Docetic view that Jesus had no real body. The issue in both cases is whether the ultimate divine guarantee in view can be meaningfully associated with what is affirmed to be less than fully reliable.<sup>56</sup>

Not everyone agrees with the doctrine of inerrancy. For example, some argue that though the Bible is fully inspired by God, it contains errors in its historical claims. Henry, however, maintains that the Bible's truth claims are seamlessly connected: if we admit errors in one part, it undermines our ability to trust the rest.

Others maintain that the Bible is inerrant only in the "original manuscripts." But as New Testament scholar Moisés Silva notes, we do not need to be overly concerned about textual variants in manuscripts because our reconstructed text of the Bible is so reliable. The key word here is *reliable*. As Silva says, "A reliable text differs from a perfect text in that reliable implies conformity to certain standards (such as the original text), while perfect implies conformity to some ideal standard. The concept of reliability does not exclude the possibility of small errors but rather implies that they are inconsequential."<sup>57</sup>

Beyond affirming the reliability of Scripture, it is important to understand how to read the Bible. Not every statement in the Bible is intended to be taken literally. Figures of speech and poetry are common. There is even some evidence that some accounts were not intended to be taken as a precise historical record—for example, the "days" of creation in Genesis. To make the Bible say something its authors didn't intend is a misuse of Scripture that, ultimately, undermines its authority.

## 8. Where Do We Get Our Ideas about Knowledge?

<!-- page-46 -->

So far we've established that the Bible is the story of God's work in the world, written by humans under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, and therefore authoritative and reliable. But many people, though they respect Jesus, don't think the Bible is knowable or reliable in the same way they know facts about the physical world. In fact, they don't think it is the kind of thing that can be "known" at all.

To address this, we need to understand something about how we know anything at all. When we say we "know" something, we mean, in a philosophical sense, that we have *justified true belief*. It is a belief we are justified in holding because it aligns with reality as it actually is. There are two views on whether such justified true belief is even possible. The first view says we are entirely a product of our evolutionary heritage, and knowledge—true, justified belief—isn't even possible. The second view says we were created by God to be knowers, and knowledge is indeed possible.

The naturalist view says that we are fundamentally products of evolution. Our beliefs are not formed as a result of reasoning about them; they exist because they helped our ancestors survive. Consider a culture of people who believe in witches and are plagued by nightmares. Because they believe witches are after them, they are constantly vigilant against

<!-- page-47 -->

magical powers over them; thus, they avoid everything that might kill them. Evolution might allow these witches to flourish, but it doesn't deliver true beliefs about the world.

Though evolution may give us faculties that help us survive, there is no guarantee that those faculties deliver truth. In other words, if everything that has come about has occurred through natural processes, there is no good reason to believe we have received true ideas about the world. In fact, we have no good reason to believe that naturalism itself is actually true. Actually, we have good reason to *doubt* it because, as Plantinga phrases it, "if naturalism and evolution were both true, our cognitive faculties would very likely not be reliable."<sup>65</sup>

As opposed to naturalism, Christian theism says that a rational God *created* us to be knowers. "God has endowed humans with a structure of rationality patterned after the ideas of His own mind: we can know truth because God has made us like himself [i.e., in his image]," philosopher Ronald Nash states.<sup>66</sup> Not only do we bear God's image as knowers, Nash says, but we do so through communication as well: "Language is a divinely given gift to facilitate communion between God and humans that is both personal and cognitive."<sup>67</sup>

> **A rational God *created* us to be knowers.**

When we say we're searching for knowledge, what we're actually looking for is "adequate reasons" for our beliefs. Some kinds of knowledge require more and better reasons than others. If I want to go skiing, I can look online for snow reports at the various ski resorts. Making a wrong choice usually isn't a big deal. After all, for those who like to ski, a bad day of skiing is better than a good day doing most other things.

When it comes to something like deciding which church to join, however, we need a much deeper level of knowledge. We need to study the church's doctrine, interview the pastor, and discern whether it is the kind of place in which we can serve effectively. If we make a thoughtless choice, we risk becoming dissatisfied and a source of discouragement to others in the church. We need a greater amount of evidence to satisfy the "adequate reasons" condition.

> **100 percent certainty is not a necessary condition for knowledge.**

Here is something you may find surprising: 100 percent certainty is not a necessary condition for knowledge. If we wait around for 100 percent certainty, we would never go skiing or join a church or get married or anything else. This is especially true in considering spiritual claims, as philosopher J. P. Moreland points out:

> One can know something without being certain about it and in the presence of doubt or the admission that one might be wrong…. When Christians claim to have knowledge of this or that, for example, that God is real, that Jesus rose from the dead, that the Bible is the Word of God, they are not saying that there is no possibility that they could be wrong, that they have no doubts, or that they have answers to every question raised against them.<sup>68</sup>

<!-- page-48 -->

In a world of uncertainty, it is comforting to know that God has given us minds to think, consider arguments rationally, and reason toward conclusions, even when we do not possess all the world's information.

Often when Dr. Moreland talks about knowledge and certainty, someone in his audience will say, "You can't know something unless you can prove it scientifically." Of course, although this claim is self-defeating—because it could not itself be scientifically proven—Moreland's response goes a bit further:

> This assertion—known as scientism—is patently false and, in fact, not even a claim of science but rather a philosophical view about science. Nevertheless, once this view of knowledge was widely embraced in the culture, the immediate effect was to marginalize and privatize religion by relegating it to the back of the intellectual bus. To verify this, one need only compare the number of times scientists, as opposed to pastors or theologians, are called upon as experts on the evening news. If knowledge and reason are identical with what can be tested scientifically or with scientific theories that a majority of scientists believes to be correct, then religion and ethics will no longer be viewed as true, rational domains of discourse because, supposedly, religious or ethical claims are not scientifically testable.<sup>69</sup>

**Scientism** is the belief that all knowledge comes through science. However, science is not the only way of knowing. In fact, in volume 2 of this series, David Noebel and I will examine nine additional ways of knowing—theological, philosophical, ethical, psychological, sociological, political, legal, economical, and historical. The scientific method gives us a disciplined way of examining the evidence of the physical world, but it cannot reasonably claim to be the source of *all* truth.

> *Scientism:* the philosophical belief that reliable knowledge is obtained solely through the scientific method.

Not everyone agrees with the definition of *knowledge as justified true belief*. Postmodern critics wonder how we can say we have objective knowledge when we all have our own personal, subjective perspectives and biases. "Whose way of thinking is right?" they challenge. Yes, people do have biases and perspectives, but does this mean that no truth can be known? Isn't it possible to *acknowledge* that no one is "purely neutral" even while we *affirm* that knowledge of the truth is possible?

Christianity makes many truth claims. Some can be tested by looking at the evidence from history or archaeology; others cannot be tested this way. As we have seen, Christianity's claims do open themselves up to rational inquiry. They can be known to be true or false. Reasonable people who seriously investigate Christianity's claims will see this to be so, according to Jonathan Morrow:

> **Christianity makes many truth claims.**

> If Christianity is relegated to the realm of fairy tales, which may provide personal significance or meaning but not knowledge, then people will continue not taking the claims of Jesus or the Christian worldview seriously. If, however, people are invited to consider the claims of Christianity as a knowledge tradition, then chances are good that they may come to know the living God and live life according to the knowledge provided in his Word.<sup>70</sup>

<!-- page-49 -->

## 9. Is It Possible to Know Anything for Certain?

It is common to hear people insist that "all truth is relative" or "there is no absolute truth." One of my professors at the University of Denver was known to assert, "There is no absolute truth—that's absolutely true." Although I was only a graduate student at the time, I found his statement self-defeating, and I said so. "If that statement is true for all of us," I replied, "then absolute truth does exist, and your statement contradicts itself. If it is true only for you and not for us, then why do you expect us to believe it?"

I'm sure the professor was trying to make a joke, but most of my classmates were bewildered, as was I. Playing along, I said, "Thank you for admitting that there is one absolute. But is it possible or conceivable that there are *two* absolutes?"

"No."

To which I replied, "Are you *sure*?"

By this point, the professor and my classmates were all chuckling. They probably still embraced relativism, but they also realized their doing so could not be sustained philosophically.

> *Self-Refuting Claim:* a statement that attempts to affirm two opposite propositions at the same time and in the same sense.

You might try something similar. If someone says, "There is no truth," ask, "Is *that* statement true?" If someone says, "That may be true for you, but not for me," ask, "Is that statement true for both of us?" A **self-refuting claim** cannot possibly be true—it is a statement that commits suicide!

Truth is the only foundation on which to build a life, but as Jonathan Morrow points out, "We live at a time in which Christians are more consumer-driven than truth-driven."<sup>75</sup> If believers are to bear redemption effectively to a needy world, this must change. As author Kelly Monroe Kullberg puts it,

> Truth yields life. If we are sailors lost at sea, we need true north. If we're branches on [a] tree hoping to bear fruit, which we are, we need connection to a true vine. Truth tells us where we are, who we are, to whom we belong, and the real story in which we can fully live. It seems to me that our American culture, in its present condition, is both lost and starving for truth, and therefore vulnerable to the deception of power politics, marketing schemes, and politically correct slogans of professors, politicians, and media that often lead to the death of the soul and the body. Lies lead to death and a culture of death, but the truth sets people free for life.<sup>76</sup>

> **These claims are revolutionary and, as you can imagine, controversial, because if the Bible's claim to reveal God is authoritative, then it extends to every area of life—to everyone in the world, at all times.**

The world is desperate for truth, but without knowing God's Word, through which he reveals his nature and character, our attempts to communicate it will be nothing more than the offering of an opinion.

## 11. Conclusion

<!-- page-52 -->

So let's review. Christianity says the Bible is God's Word. Through it, the almighty God, creator of the universe, speaks to humankind; that is, the Bible is God's revelation. As theologian Darrell Bock says,

> The Bible is not a book like any other. It makes a claim that God spoke and speaks through its message. It argues that as his creatures, we are accountable to him for what he has revealed. The trustworthiness of Scripture points to its authority as well. Scripture is far more than a history book, as good and trustworthy as that history is.

<!-- page-53 -->

It is a book that calls us to examine our lives and relationship to God. Beyond the fascinating history, it contains vital and life-transforming truths about God and us.<sup>77</sup>

These claims are revolutionary and, as you can imagine, controversial, because if the Bible's claim to reveal God is authoritative, then it extends to every area of life—to everyone in the world, at all times. And there are many who are determined not to let that happen. In the next chapter, we'll wade right into the middle of the controversy and consider whether the Bible's claims to authority are actually authoritative for our lives today.

## Endnotes

1. For more on Bible translation efforts around the world, see "What's Been Done, What's Left to Do: Latest Bible Translation Statistics," Wycliffe Bible Translators, wycliffe.org.uk/wycliffe/about/vision-whatwedo.html.
2. Lamar Vest, "Does the Bible Still Matter in 2012?," Fox News, April 29, 2012, www.foxnews.com/opinion/2012/04/29/does-bible-still-matter-in-2012/.
3. "Barna Studies the Research, Offers a Year-in-Review Perspective," Barna Group, December 18, 2009, www.barna.org/barna-update/article/12-faithspirituality/325-barna-studies-the-research-offers-a-year-in-review-perspective#.UnJ5mKWL3jc.
4. *The State of the Bible, 2013: A Study of U. S. Adults* (New York: American Bible Society, 2013), www.americanbible.org/uploads/content/State%20of%20the%20Bible%20Report%202013.pdf.
5. *State of the Bible*.
6. *State of the Bible*.
7. Cathy Lynn Grossman, "Americans Get an 'F' in Religion," *USA Today*, March 14, 2007, usatoday30.usatoday.com/news/religion/2007-03-07-teaching-religion-cover_n.htm.
8. *State of the Bible*.
9. Kevin Roose, "Quick, Can You Name a Gospel?," *Forbes*, April 8, 2009, www.forbes.com/2009/04/08/unlikely-disciple-roose-bible-opinions-contributors-christian-easter.html.
10. See Stephen Prothero, *Religious Literacy: What Every American Needs to Know—and Doesn't* (New York: HarperOne, 2008), chap 1.
11. Sally Lloyd-Jones, *The Jesus Storybook Bible: Every Story Whispers His Name* (Grand Rapids, MI: ZonderKids, 2007), 12–17.
12. Alexis de Tocqueville, *Democracy in America*, ed. J. P. Mayer, trans. George Lawrence (New York: Harper Perennial, 1969), 291.
13. John Jay to Maria, October 21, 1794, in *Selected Letters of John Jay and Sarah Livingston Jay* (Jefferson, NC: McFarland, 2005), 235.
14. John Adams, "The Rights of the Colonists: The Report of the Committee of Correspondence to the Boston Town Meeting, November 20, 1772," Constitution Society, last modified March 8, 2015, www.constitution.org/bcp/right_col.htm.
15. Noah Webster, *History of the United States* (New Haven, CT: Durrie and Peck, 1832), 339.
16. Benjamin Rush, "A Defense of the Use of the Bible in Schools," in *The American Museum, or, Universal Magazine* 9, from January to June 1791 (Philadelphia: Carey, Stewart, 1791): 129.
17. John Adams, "Letter from John Adams to Thomas Jefferson: December 25, 1813," Beliefnet, www.beliefnet.com/resourcelib/docs/72/Letter_from_John_Adams_to_Thomas_Jefferson_1.html.
18. John Quincy Adams, *Letters by John Quincy Adams to His Son on the Bible and Its Teachings* (Auburn, ME: James A. Alden, 1850), 119.
19. Abraham Lincoln, "Reply to Loyal Colored People of Baltimore upon Presentation of a Bible: September 7, 1864," *Collected Works of Abraham Lincoln*, vol. 7, quod.lib.umich.edu/l/lincoln/lrgn=div1;singlegenre=All;sort=occur;subview=detail;type=simple;view=fulltext;q1=September+7%2C+1864.
20. Theodore Roosevelt, "On Reading the Bible," *The Christian Century* 36, no. 13 (March 27, 1919): 8.
21. James Kearney, *The Political Education of Woodrow Wilson* (New York: The Century Company, 1926), 273.
22. Calvin Coolidge, "Religion: Our Nation's Strength," *The Delineator*, vol. C, no. 6 (July 1922): 2.
23. Franklin D. Roosevelt, *The Public Papers and Addresses of Franklin D. Roosevelt* (New York: Random House, 1938), 420.
24. Harry S. Truman, *Harry S. Truman: Containing the Public Messages, Speeches, and Statements of the President, 1945–53* (Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office, 1961), 157.
25. Ronald Reagan, "Proclamation 5018 of February 3, 1983, 'Year of the Bible,'" in *Federal Code of Regulations, 1983 Compilation* (Washington, DC: Office of the Federal Register, 1984), 9.
26. For a photograph of the proclamation, see www.loc.gov/exhibits/vc006473.jpg.
27. Richard Dawkins, "Why I Want All Our Children to Read the King James Bible," *The Guardian*, May 19, 2012, www.guardian.co.uk/science/2012/may/19/richard-dawkins-king-james-bible.
28. See Alvin J. Schmidt, *How Christianity Changed the World* (Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2004).
29. William Lyon Phelps, *Human Nature in the Bible* (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1922), ix.
30. Matthew 7:12: "Whatever you wish that others would do to you, do also to them, for this is the Law and the Prophets"; Mark 12:29–31: Jesus answered, "The most important is, 'Hear, O Israel: The Lord our God, the Lord is one. And you shall love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your mind and with all your strength.' The second is this: 'You shall love your neighbor as yourself'"; Exodus 3:6: "He said, 'I am the God of your father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.' And Moses hid his face, for he was afraid to look at God"; Deuteronomy 6:4–5: "Hear, O Israel: The LORD our God, the LORD is one. You shall love the LORD your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your might"; Leviticus 19:18: "You shall not take vengeance or bear a grudge against the sons of your own people, but you shall love your neighbor as yourself: I am the LORD."
31. Bertrand Russell, *Human Society in Ethics and Politics* (New York: Mentor, 1962), viii.
32. 2 Peter 3:16: "As he does in all his letters when he speaks in them of these matters. There are some things in them that are hard to understand, which the ignorant and unstable twist to their own destruction, as they do the other Scriptures."
33. Acts 17:1–4: "Now when they had passed through Amphipolis and Apollonia, they came to Thessalonica, where there was a synagogue of the Jews. And Paul went in, as was his custom, and on three Sabbath days he reasoned with them from the Scriptures, explaining that it was necessary for the Christ to suffer and to rise from the dead, and saying, 'This Jesus, whom I proclaim to you, is the Christ.' And some of them were persuaded and joined Paul and Silas, as did a great many of the devout Greeks and not a few of the leading women."
34. See the Quran 10:94; 16:43; 21:7.
35. See, for example, Quran 2:40–44; 2:121.
36. See the Quran 2 in its entirety for insight into how the Quran is to be believed and not questioned.
37. N. T. Wright, *Simply Christian: Why Christianity Makes Sense* (New York: HarperCollins, 2006), 188.
38. Robert Lewis Plummer, *40 Questions about Interpreting the Bible* (Grand Rapids, MI: Kregel, 2010), 99.
39. Millard Erickson, *Christian Theology*, 2nd ed. (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2001), 201.
40. Gordon R. Lewis, "What Is Divine Revelation?," in Ted Cabal et al., eds., *The Apologetics Study Bible* (Nashville: B&H, 2007), 1823.
41. Erik Thoennes, *Life's Biggest Questions: What the Bible Says about the Things That Matter Most* (Wheaton, IL: Crossway), 41–42.
42. D. A. Carson, *The God Who Is There: Finding Your Place in God's Story* (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Books, 2010), 20.
43. Charles W. Colson, *Born Again* (Grand Rapids, MI: Chosen, 1976), 26–27, quoted in Eric Metaxas, *Seven Men: And the Secret to Their Greatness* (Nashville: Thomas Nelson, 2013), 167.
44. Bruce Demarest, "General Revelation," in *Evangelical Dictionary of Theology*, ed. Walter A. Elwell (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2001), 1019–21.
45. Erickson, *Christian Theology*, 201.
46. N. T. Wright, *The Last Word: Scripture and the Authority of God—Getting beyond the Bible Wars* (New York: HarperOne, 2005), 25.
47. Jonathan Morrow, *Welcome to College: A Christ-Follower's Guide for the Journey* (Grand Rapids, MI: Kregel, 2008), 88.
48. Nancy Pearcey, *Total Truth: Liberating Christianity from Its Cultural Captivity* (Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2004), 178.
49. William Lane Craig, *Reasonable Faith: Christian Truth and Apologetics*, 3rd ed. (Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2008), 207.
50. Garry K. Brantley, "The Dead Sea Scrolls and the Biblical Integrity," Apologetics Press, www.apologeticspress.org/apcontent.aspx?category=13&article=357.
51. Morrow, *Welcome to College*, 88.
52. David K. Clark, *To Know and Love God: Method for Theology* (Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2003), 65.
53. Gordon R. Lewis, "What Does It Mean, 'God Inspired the Bible?,'" in Ted Cabal et al., eds., *The Apologetics Study Bible* (Nashville: B&H, 2007), 1812.
54. Lewis, "What Does It Mean," 1812.
55. Robert Saucy, *Scripture: Its Power, Authority, and Relevance* (Nashville: Word, 2001), 78. See also Carl F. H. Henry's chapter "The Lost Unity of the Bible," in *God, Revelation and Authority*, vol. 4, *God Who Speaks and Shows: Fifteen Theses, Part Three*, 2nd ed. (Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 1999).
56. Henry, *God, Revelation and Authority*.
57. David S. Dockery, *Christian Scripture: An Evangelical Perspective on Inspiration, Authority, and Interpretation* (Nashville: Broadman & Holman, 1995), 64, quoted in Morrow, *Welcome to College*, 81.
58. The term personal-infinite comes from Francis Schaeffer in *He Is There and He Is Not Silent* (Carol Stream, IL: Tyndale.
59. For an extended, documented version of this argument, see Douglas R. Groothuis, *Christian Apologetics: A Comprehensive Case for Biblical Faith* (Downers Grove, IL: IVP Academic, 2011), especially chaps. 19 and 20.
60. In addition to Groothuis, *Christian Apologetics*, see also John R. Stott, *The Authority of the Bible* (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity, 1974).
61. Jonathan Morrow, *Think Christianly: Looking at the Intersection of Faith and Culture* (Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2011), 95.
62. Hosea 4:6: "My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge; because you have rejected knowledge, I reject you from being a priest to me. And since you have forgotten the law of your God, I also will forget your children."
63. Dallas Willard, *Knowing Christ Today: Why We Can Trust Spiritual Knowledge* (New York: HarperOne, 2009), 39.
64. J. I. Packer, *Knowing God*, 20th anniv. ed. (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity, 1993), 19.
65. Alvin Plantinga, *Where the Conflict Really Lies: Science, Religion, and Naturalism* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011), 314. A PDF of Plantinga's paper "Naturalism Defeated" may be found online at www.calvin.edu/academic/philosophy/virtual_library/articles/plantinga_alvin/naturalism_defeated.pdf.
66. Ronald Nash, *The Word of God and the Mind of Man: The Crisis of Revealed Truth in Contemporary Theology* (Phillipsburg, NJ: P&R, 1992), 81, 132.
67. Nash, *The Word of God*, 81, 132.
68. J. P. Moreland, *Love Your God with All Your Mind: The Role of Reason in the Life of the Soul*, rev. ed. (Colorado Springs, CO: NavPress, 2012), 56–57.
69. Moreland, *Love Your God*, 29.
70. Morrow, *Think Christianly*, 101.
71. Gregory Koukl, *Tactics: A Plan for Discussing Your Christian Convictions* (Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2009), 32.
72. Aristotle, *Metaphysics*, ed. Roger Bishop Jones, trans. W. D. Ross, 58–59, texts.rbjones.com/rbjpub/philos/classics/aristotl/mbook_draft.pdf.
73. Groothuis, *Christian Apologetics*, 124.
74. Groothuis, *Christian Apologetics*, 126.
75. Morrow, *Think Christianly*, 13.
76. Quoted in Morrow, *Think Christianly*, 50.
77. Darrell L. Bock, *Can I Trust the Bible? Defending the Bible's Reliability* (Norcross, GA: RZIM, 2001), 52.