<!-- page-57 -->

# Does the Bible Have Authority?

## 1. Masters of Our Fate

At 8:00 a.m., hospital personnel strapped the patient to a gurney at the federal penitentiary in Terre Haute, Indiana. The doctor calmly administered a dose of sodium thiopental, rendering the patient unconscious, followed by a dose of pancuronium bromize to stop his breathing and paralyze his body.

<!-- page-58 -->

Finally, the doctor injected a dose of potassium chloride, stopping his heart. At 8:14 a.m., June 11, 2001, the doctor pronounced him dead.

His name was Timothy McVeigh. A young man in his early thirties, McVeigh had parked a moving truck loaded with five thousand pounds of explosives in front of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City and lit the fuse. In the blast 171 people, including three unborn children, were killed.

When asked what he would say to the families of his victims, McVeigh snapped, remorse­lessly, "To these people in Oklahoma who have lost a loved one, I'm sorry but it happens every day. You're not the first mother to lose a kid, or the first grandparent to lose a grandson or a granddaughter. It happens every day, somewhere in the world."<sup>1</sup> Just before his execution, he was asked for his final words. He silently handed the prison warden a handwritten copy of a poem.

> Out of the night that covers me,
> Black as the Pit from pole to pole,
> I thank whatever gods may be
> For my unconquerable soul.
>
> In the fell clutch of circumstance
> I have not winced nor cried aloud.
> Under the bludgeonings of chance
> My head is bloody, but unbowed.
>
> Beyond this place of wrath and tears
> Looms but the Horror of the shade,
> And yet the menace of the years
> Finds and shall find me unafraid.
>
> It matters not how straight the gate,
> How charged with punishments the scroll,
> I am the master of my fate:
> I am the captain of my soul.

You might recognize the poem. It is titled "Invictus" (Latin for "unconquered"), and it was written by William Ernest Henley (1849–1903) during a difficult illness as an anthem of perseverance. McVeigh, however, transmuted it into a paean to **anarchy**: *I am my own authority. I answer to none.*

> *Anarchy:* a society that exists without government control.

> *Authority:* the power to command or the expertise to influence others.

**Authority** comes from a Latin word meaning "influence" or "command." It answers the question "Who is in charge?" Growing up, I saw the statement "Question Authority" plastered on bumper stickers and buttons and spray-painted on subway cars. There is, of course, a warranted democratic sentiment to it: don't believe everything you hear, especially from the government. This is probably what

<!-- page-59 -->

Benjamin Franklin had in mind when he said, "It is the first responsibility of every citizen to question authority."<sup>2</sup>

Today, however, the statement "Question Authority" usually expresses radical individualism. "No one has the right to tell me what to do," people say. Few enjoy being told what to do or how to think. Yet the insolent rejection of authority sweeps away the baby with the bathwater, removing both illegitimate and legitimate forms of authority: both unthinking rhetoric *and* public reason, both manipulation *and* persuasion are cast away. When all authority is banished, civil society becomes impossible. But as the iconic musician Bob Dylan sang, "You're gonna have to serve somebody." How can we know when to submit and when to oppose?

For Christians, the lines of authority are clear: to confess "Jesus is Lord" is to proclaim one's submission to Jesus's authority.<sup>3</sup> Refusal to acknowledge God's authority is serious business, for we are all accountable to him. In both Romans 14:10–12 and Philippians 2:9–11, the apostle Paul quotes Isaiah 45:23<sup>4</sup> in claiming that every knee shall bow and every tongue confess to God.

> **For Christians, the lines of authority are clear: to confess "Jesus is Lord" is to proclaim one's submission to Jesus's authority.**

The New Testament word for "obey" in Greek literally means "to hear under" (that is, to place oneself under authority). Embracing Jesus's worldview—believing what he believed and obeying his teaching—is an invitation to "a long obedience in the same direction," a journey toward conformity to Christ.<sup>5</sup> Romans 8:29 says, "Those whom he foreknew he also predestined to be conformed to the image of his Son."

Mindless mimicry is not the goal of our conformity to Christ. Jesus said we are to love the Lord God with our entire *minds* (Matt. 22:37).<sup>6</sup> Paul said we are to be transformed by the renewing of our *minds* (Rom. 12:2).<sup>7</sup> You do not have to be brilliant to be Christ-like, but you cannot be blissfully mindless either.

> **You do not have to be brilliant to be Christ-like, but you cannot be blissfully mindless either.**

Of course, even if we are mindful, we may find ourselves baffled by God's commands. For example, forgiving our enemies seems counterintuitive, as does patiently enduring suffering. Still, the Bible regularly invades personal space: it tells us how to treat our friends, our parents, our spouses, and our children. It tells us how to think about politics and entertainment, how to use money, and how to act toward others. Saying "Jesus is Lord" commits us to a certain way of seeing—and living in—the world.

Although there is much we will not understand, Christians for millennia have maintained that what God wants is not unknowably mysterious. Authors W. Gary Phillips, William E. Brown, and John Stonestreet explain:

> If God's Person is such that He can function with human language (certainly being greater than man!), then God *could* condescend to communicate verbally to man. If God's character is such that He is both a truthful and loving Creator who is concerned about His creatures, then God *would* condescend to communicate verbally to man. No loving God would play cosmic hide-and-seek with His beloved ones.<sup>8</sup>

<!-- page-60 -->

Christians throughout the ages have maintained that God makes himself known most clearly through Scripture. If this is true, obedience to what the Bible says is of paramount importance. We'll explore this idea in the coming pages, assuming the following precepts:

- The Bible is authorized by God and uses human language to communicate heavenly principles to earthly society.

- The Bible is trustworthy in this communication because it is God himself who is the ultimate communicator, speaking through the authors of each of its books.

- The Bible is clear in this communication. You don't have to be a highly trained expert to understand it.

- The Bible, being in written form, can be accurately transmitted from generation to generation.

- If the Bible is authorized by God, trustworthy, and clearly communicated in written form, then it is reasonable to regard it as having authority.

In this chapter, we will examine the Bible's claim to authority both internally and externally and deal with common objections such as "The Bible was written only by men," "The Bible has been corrupted," and "Important books have been left out of the Bible." At the end, we'll look at what sort of commitment this authority calls for. We will begin with what the Bible says about itself.

## 2. Internal Evidence for the Bible's Authority

The Bible is divided into two sections, usually called the Old Testament and the New Testament. The Old Testament includes thirty-nine books of history, poetry, and prophecy. The New Testament contains twenty-seven books that are history (Gospels, Acts), letters (the epistles), and the apocalyptic book of Revelation. The Old Testament narrative begins with Genesis and ends with 2 Chronicles, around four hundred years before Christ. Other documents gathered in the Apocrypha (from the Greek word for "hidden") cover the gap in time, but many Christians do not consider them authoritative with the rest of the biblical **canon** (from the Greek word for "standard"; a common word used for the accepted list of books in the Bible).

> *Canon:* from the Greek word for "standard"; the collection of biblical writings commonly accepted as genuine and authoritative.

The Bible claims authority for itself, internally. To nonbelievers, choosing to submit to such authority sounds crazy, but the Bible claims it nonetheless. Throughout the Old Testament, phrases such as "Thus says the Lord" and "The Word of the Lord came to me saying" occur over two thousand times. The writers claimed to communicate God's authoritative revelation.

<!-- page-61 -->

We'll discuss the authority the Bible claims for itself in three parts: Jesus's assertion of authority, Jesus's trust of the Bible's authority, and Jesus's conferring of authority on his disciples.

**Jesus asserted authority.** Jesus claimed to be not only God's spokesman but also God in the flesh. In contrast to the Old Testament prophets who said, "Thus says the Lord" or "The Word of the Lord came to me," Jesus said, "You have heard it said, but I say to you …" and "Truly, truly, I say unto you …" He claims divine authority to reveal what God wants us to understand. Here are two examples:

> And when Jesus finished these sayings, the crowds were astonished at his teaching, for he was teaching them as one who had authority, and not as their scribes. (Matt. 7:28–29)

> And immediately Jesus, perceiving in his spirit that they thus questioned within themselves, said to them, "Why do you question these things in your hearts? Which is easier, to say to the paralytic, 'Your sins are forgiven,' or to say, 'Rise, take up your bed and walk'? But that you may know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins'—he said to the paralytic—'I say to you, rise, pick up your bed, and go home.' And he rose and immediately picked up his bed and went out before them all, so that they were all amazed and glorified God, saying, 'We never saw anything like this!'" (Mark 2:8–12)

Jesus's authority was not part of his office as rabbi but part of his nature as God. He claimed to be the "I Am" of the Old Testament (John 8:58).<sup>9</sup> He said he and God are "one" **essence** (10:30)<sup>10</sup> and that those who had seen him had seen God (14:7–9).<sup>11</sup> Jesus claimed authority over heaven and earth, including the power of all judgment (5:22),<sup>12</sup> astonishing his audience, enemies, and disciples.<sup>13</sup>

> *Essence:* defining attributes that give an entity its fundamental identity.

In chapter 2, we talked about Scripture being written through the inspiration of the Holy Spirit. But Jesus's disciples also witnessed Jesus's authority in the flesh and were commissioned by him to be apostles and carry his authority to the world. As twentieth-century theologian Carl F. H. Henry put it,

> The apostles, to be sure, did not rest the case for Christian realities wholly upon divine inspiration, that is, upon the Spirit's supernatural guidance in … written teaching. First and foremost they were eyewitnesses of the historical facets of Jesus's life and ministry … [which] preceded their apostolic authorization…. Without the resurrection eyewitnessing there would be no commission for world witnessing. Without the Spirit's guidance there would be no divinely authoritative teaching.<sup>14</sup>

The biblical account is clear: Jesus claimed authority. But that's not all.

**Jesus trusted the Bible's authority.** Many people like Jesus's *decency*, not his *divinity*; they approve of his teachings but not of the commotion regarding his claims to be God. As we have seen, though, Jesus claimed authority far beyond the goodness of his moral teachings. In fact,

<!-- page-62 -->

he claimed far more than that: he considered all of Scripture to be authoritative. One cannot consistently embrace as authoritative some of Jesus's teaching while rejecting his teaching about the Bible itself.<sup>15</sup>

Theologian and pastor W. Gary Phillips summarizes Jesus's trust in Scripture:<sup>16</sup>

- Jesus consistently refers to the Old Testament (in both quotation and allusions) as the present and eternal truth of God. When he quotes Scripture, he uses the present tense ("it says" or "it is saying") or the perfect tense ("it is written" or "it stands written"). These teachings are not in the *past*; they are for *now*.

- Jesus always assumes that Scripture is final in authority and that each part is of equal authority, whether it is an obscure reference to how King David referred to God (Matt. 22:41–45 in reference to Ps. 110:1)<sup>17</sup> or the Pharisees' objection to him calling himself the Son of God (John 10:34–36 in reference to Ps. 82:6).<sup>18</sup>

- Jesus always assumes that Old Testament prophecies must be fulfilled as given (Matt. 5:17).<sup>19</sup> He refers to them as that which "must be fulfilled" (Luke 24:44).<sup>20</sup>

- Jesus always treats the miraculous events of the Old Testament as if they occurred exactly as written. This is true even for the ones thought to be scientifically "embarrassing" today, such as Adam and Eve's literal existence, Noah's flood, Sodom's judgment, Moses's burning bush, the miracle of manna in the wilderness, and the story of Jonah and the great fish.

- Jesus leans on the Old Testament in his personal spiritual anguish. He does this during his temptation in the wilderness (Matt. 4:1–10) and in his crucifixion when he quotes Psalm 22 (Matt. 27:46).<sup>21</sup>

- Jesus never hesitates to confront error, but he says absolutely nothing about problems in the Scriptures. Apparently, at least in the parts of his ministry recorded in the Gospels, Jesus found nothing to confront in the Old Testament. If anything, he builds on the foundation of the Old Testament by clarifying the profound extent to which its teachings must be applied. (For example, in Matthew 5:27–28, he says, "You have heard that it was said, 'You shall not commit adultery.' But I say to you that everyone who looks at a woman with lustful intent has already committed adultery with her in his heart.")

Summarizing Jesus's teachings, Carl F. H. Henry said, "All four Gospels evidence the truth that Jesus affirmed the authority of Scripture. Luke 24:25 records Christ's view of the authority of the Old Testament, and this, in correlation with John 14:26, implies his similar view of the New Testament."<sup>22</sup>

**Jesus conferred authority on his disciples.** Jesus's disciples were eyewitnesses to his authority, and before the completion of his earthly ministry, Jesus conferred his own authority upon them.

<!-- page-63 -->

> He called to him his twelve disciples and gave them *authority* over unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal every disease and every affliction. (Matt. 10:1)

> All things have been handed over to me by my Father, and no one knows the Son except the Father, and no one knows the Father except the Son and *anyone to whom the Son chooses to reveal him.* (Matt. 11:27)

This conferred authority extended beyond the time boundaries of Jesus's earthly ministry:

> These things I have spoken to you while I am still with you. But the Helper, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my name, he will teach you all things and bring to your remembrance all that I have said to you. (John 14:25–26)

> When the Helper comes, whom I will send to you from the Father, the Spirit of truth, who proceeds from the Father, he will bear witness about me. And you also will bear witness, because you have been with me from the beginning. (John 15:26–27)

> I still have many things to say to you, but you cannot bear them now. When the Spirit of truth comes, he will guide you into all the truth, for he will not speak on his own authority, but whatever he hears he will speak, and he will declare to you the things that are to come. He will glorify me, for he will take what is mine and declare it to you. All that the Father has is mine; therefore I said that he will take what is mine and declare it to you. (John 16:12–15)

On the night before going to the cross, Jesus imparted authority to his disciples, praying, "I do not ask for these only, but also for those who will believe in me through *their* word" (John 17:20). And after his resurrection, Jesus issued a clear and powerful statement of conferred authority that we call the Great Commission:

> **After his resurrection, Jesus issued a clear and powerful statement of conferred authority that we call the Great Commission.**

> And Jesus came and said to them, "All authority in heaven and on earth has been given to me. Go therefore and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, teaching them to observe all that I have commanded you. And behold, I am with you always, to the end of the age." (Matt. 28:18–20)

The disciples obeyed. They went proclaiming this message "in Jesus's name" (Acts 3:6, 16; 4:7, 10, 12, 17–18, 30). Even Jesus's enemies recognized the authority with which Jesus's disciples spoke: "Now when they saw the boldness of Peter and John, and perceived that they were uneducated, common men, they were astonished. And they recognized that they had been with Jesus" (Acts 4:13).

<!-- page-64 -->

Jesus had authority, the disciples were given authority by him, and their work was authoritative *because he said it would be*. Peter classified Paul's collected writings with the "Scriptures" (2 Pet. 3:16);<sup>23</sup> Paul even quoted Luke's gospel and called it "Scripture" (1 Tim. 5:18).<sup>24</sup>

Let's review. Jesus claimed authority for his own ministry, the Scriptures, and the ministry of his disciples. Skeptics might still be skeptical, though. Is there any evidence *outside* Scripture offering credibility to the Bible's authority? The answer is an emphatic yes. Let's take a look at some of this evidence now.

> **Is there any evidence *outside* Scripture offering credibility to the Bible's authority?**

## 3. External Evidence for the Bible's Authority

A person's testimony about him- or herself constitutes *internal* evidence for authority. But the claims of others *external* to the person can add a different kind of credibility. So far we've examined Jesus's authority based on the words of the Bible itself, but is there any testimony about the Bible's truthfulness from outside sources? If a longtime basketball player said, "My career three-point shot percentage was 65 percent," we might scoff in doubt. If, however, we uncovered an old record book verifying the claim, we might reasonably say, "It sounds too good to be true, but I must give this player the benefit of the doubt."

The absence of external evidence, though, would not mean the player is lying. He might be telling the truth, but, for one reason or another, we choose not to believe him. In the same way, lack of external evidence would not be proof of the Bible's falsity. Kenneth A. Kitchen says, "Absence of evidence is not evidence of absence."<sup>25</sup>

> "Absence of evidence is not evidence of absence."

Professor emeritus of biblical studies Philip R. Davies provides an example of why we should not assume that a biblical source is untrustworthy just because we haven't yet found evidence. A professor at the University of Sheffield in England, Davies wrote the following in a book called *In Search of 'Ancient Israel'*: "There are no literary criteria for believing David to be more historical than Joshua, Joshua more historical than Abraham, and Abraham more historical than Adam. There is no literary tradition referring to the house of David, none of these characters has left a trace outside the biblical text!"<sup>26</sup> But just a year after Davies's book was published, an inscription referring to the house of David was found at the Tel Dan archaeological dig. Such an inscription implies the existence of not only David but also a kingly dynasty named after him. Israel Finkelstein, professor of archaeology at Tel Aviv University, remarked, "Biblical nihilism collapsed overnight with the discovery of the David inscription."<sup>27</sup> And more recently, archaeologists have discovered what they believe to be a palace or temple of David, providing additional evidence for David as a historical person.<sup>28</sup>

The presence of historically verifiable external evidence, such as the David inscription and discovery of a Davidic temple, adds weight to the Bible's truthfulness. It provides the kind of converging evidence one would expect a divinely authoritative book to possess. Not all discoveries are as dramatic as the David inscription, but as television correspondent and religion writer Jeffery Sheler observed,

<!-- page-65 -->

We have discovered an abundance of evidence—both direct and indirect—that sheds light on the historical claims and the context of the Scriptures. … As we have examined that evidence and considered the scholarly arguments drawn from it, and as we have compared the Scriptures to other written histories from the ancient Near East, we have found the Bible consistently and substantially affirmed as a credible and reliable source of history.<sup>29</sup>

Dennis Ingolfsland, a professor at Crown College, has compiled a lengthy list of archaeological discoveries from each of several centuries before Christ verifying the accuracy of many of the Bible's claims. These discoveries do not establish the inspiration, inerrancy, and authority of the Bible, but they do point to the reasonableness of belief in Scripture's truthfulness. Here are some examples.

- Eleventh century BC—Most of the cities mentioned from Genesis through the book of Joshua have been discovered: Ur (Gen. 11:28) and Erech (Gen. 10:10);<sup>30</sup> Shechem (Gen. 12:6);<sup>31</sup> Gerar (Gen. 20:1);<sup>32</sup> Pithom and Raamses (Exod. 1:11);<sup>33</sup> Arad, Jericho, Lachish, Bethel, Gezer, Ashdod, Bethshan, Megiddo, Hazor, and Eglon (Josh. 2–17);<sup>34</sup> Shiloh, Joppa, and Hammath (Josh. 18–21).<sup>35</sup>

- Tenth century BC—Some of the building projects of Solomon have been unearthed at Megiddo and Gezer. At tenth-century Megiddo levels, there was a palace fortified by a massive wall and defensive towers, as well as stables.<sup>36</sup>

- Ninth century BC—The Monolith Inscription of Shalmaneser mentions "Ahab the Israelite" as having the most powerful military elements in the Israelite and Syrian coalition.<sup>37</sup>

- Eighth century BC—The Khorsabad Annals give the account of Sargon II's captivity of Samaria in 722: "I besieged and captured Samaria, carrying off 27,290 of the people who dwelt therein."<sup>38</sup>

- Seventh century BC—The tunnel Hezekiah built to bring water into Jerusalem has been found (2 Kings 20:20; 2 Chron. 32:30). It even had an inscription written in eighth-century script.<sup>39</sup>

- Sixth century BC—The Annals of Nebuchadnezzar II mention the taking of "the city of Judah" (Jerusalem) by Nebuchadnezzar (2 Kings 24:10).<sup>40</sup> It says that he appointed a new king (v. 17)<sup>41</sup> and that he carried great amounts of treasure from Jerusalem to Babylon (vv. 13–16).<sup>42</sup>

- Fifth century BC—Critics once denied many aspects of the book of Ezra on the basis that the Aramaic segment it contains was late. They dated it to the third century BC, after the time of Alexander the Great. The discovery of the Elephantine papyri (legal contracts, deeds, official documents, agreements, diplomatic texts, and private letters)

<!-- page-66 -->

shows that Aramaic was the language of trade and diplomacy in the time of Ezra and that the Aramaic used in the book of Ezra was characteristic of the fifth century BC.

This is remarkable external evidence. Volumes of such evidence have been collected. If you would like to read more, I recommend *On the Reliability of the Old Testament*, by Kenneth A. Kitchen (professor emeritus of Egyptology and honorary research fellow at the School of Archaeology, Classics, and Egyptology, University of Liverpool, England).<sup>43</sup>

What about the historical reliability of the New Testament? First, several documents outside the Bible support the basic outlines of the story told in the Gospels. Historian Edwin Yamauchi says,

> Even if we did not have the New Testament or Christian writings, we would be able to conclude from such non-Christian writings as Josephus, the Talmud, Tacitus, and Pliny the Younger that … Jesus was a Jewish teacher; many people believed he performed healings and exorcisms; he was rejected by the Jewish leaders; he was crucified under Pontius Pilate in the reign of Tiberius; despite this shameful death, his followers, who believed that he was still alive, spread beyond Palestine so that there were multitudes of them in Rome by AD 64; all kinds of people from the cities and countryside—men and women, slave and free—worshipped him as God by the beginning of the second century.<sup>44</sup>

This kind of evidence does not *prove* Jesus's life and actions, but a reasonable person, in view of how this evidence converges with the biblical testimony, should give Scripture the benefit of the doubt.

> **This kind of evidence does not *prove* Jesus's life and actions, but a reasonable person, in view of how this evidence converges with the biblical testimony, should give Scripture the benefit of the doubt.**

The book of Acts in the New Testament is an interesting place to look for confirming evidence because it is a story line within which most of the writings of the apostle Paul are embedded. Written by Luke, the medical doctor mentioned earlier, Acts of the Apostles gives a number of historical details for which we might be able to find archaeological evidence. New Testament scholar F. F. Bruce, in his book *The New Testament Documents: Are They Reliable?*, collected a remarkable listing of historical affirmations (having to do with terminology and titles) that begin with the first missionary journey in Acts 13, all of which validate the historical accuracy of the only "history book" of the early church.<sup>45</sup>

For example, skeptics have challenged the reference to "proconsuls" (plural) in Acts 19:38 because elsewhere there was only one proconsul at a time. But proconsul Junius Silanus had been assassinated a few months before the Ephesian riot by "messengers" from Agrippina, mother of the recently installed emperor Nero. These two "messengers" assumed the reins of government until their successor arrived from Rome. If the events of Acts 19 took place (as it seems) within this window of time, then this serves as a remarkable case of historical accuracy.<sup>47</sup>

We can learn two things from this example. First, the person who wrote the Acts of the Apostles accurately recorded verifiable details, making him a credible witness. Second, in the

<!-- page-67 -->

ancient world, there is really no way someone would have known these details unless he had actually traveled to the cities that are described. The various verified accounts provide evidence that the journeys took place the way the author said they did.

The evidence provided here just scratches the surface. There is much more evidence affirming the basic historical truthfulness of the Bible in those areas that can be verified, even with accounts of miracles that people today find unbelievable. John P. Meier, a professor at the University of Notre Dame, rigorously studied the gospel miracles and reported his findings in a volume more than 1,100 pages in length. He found that almost half of them included enough detail to conclude that the historical scene they described could, in fact, have occurred as reported.<sup>48</sup> Graham Twelftree, a professor at Regent University School of Divinity, thinks the percentage is even higher: possibly three-fourths of the miracle accounts in the Gospels included historical details that could be verified.<sup>49</sup>

> **The various verified accounts provide evidence that the journeys took place the way the author said they did.**

Such evidence gives skeptics good reason to acknowledge the basic truthfulness of the Bible. For the Christian, the motivation is even stronger: the testimony of Jesus about the Bible, about himself, and about his disciples is powerful evidence of the Bible's claim for an authority that extends to every aspect of our lives.

> **The testimony of Jesus about the Bible, about himself, and about his disciples is powerful evidence of the Bible's claim for an authority that extends to every aspect of our lives.**

Even so, many questions remain: How could the Bible, written by men, actually claim to be authoritative over our lives? Wasn't the Bible corrupted over time? What about other "gospels" and ancient texts ignored by the early church fathers—don't those disprove some of the things in the Bible? Let's take a look at each of these objections.

## 4. Answering Objections to the Authority of the Bible

People are skeptical of the Bible for all sorts of reasons, some good and some bad. Here are the three most common objections.

**Objection 1: The Bible was written by human beings.** Obviously, the Bible did not descend from heaven in its complete form. It was penned by about forty authors over a time span of approximately 1,500 years. Even so, the Bible describes the origin of Scripture as a process that is both fully human and fully divine:

- The apostle Peter: "Knowing this first of all, that no prophecy of Scripture comes from someone's own interpretation. For no prophecy was ever produced by the will of man, but men spoke from God as they were carried along by the Holy Spirit" (2 Pet. 1:20–21).

- The apostle Paul: "As for you, continue in what you have learned and have firmly believed, knowing from whom you learned it and how from childhood you have been

<!-- page-68 -->

acquainted with the sacred writings, which are able to make you wise for salvation through faith in Christ Jesus. All Scripture is breathed out by God and profitable for teaching, for reproof, for correction, and for training in righteousness, that the man of God may be complete, equipped for every good work" (2 Tim. 3:14–17).

Here's the rub. We know that people are capable of lying (either on purpose or by letting mistaken impressions stand) or writing untrue things because they were deceived into believing them. A skeptic might insist, at some point in the course of the 1,500 years it took to compile the Bible, this must have happened, right? So how can we trust the authority of Scripture?

To answer this objection, we must first decide whether humans are capable of saying or writing down *anything* that is true. If so, they would not be capable of truthfully writing down what God told them to? Author and speaker Greg Koukl makes this point through a series of questions: "Do you have any books in your library? Were those books written by humans? Do you find any truth in them? Is there a reason you think the Bible is less truthful or reliable than other books you own? Do people always make mistakes in what they write? Do you think that if God did exist, he would be capable of using humans to write down exactly what he wants? If not, why not?"<sup>50</sup> In the end, the person who insists that the authors of the Bible must have lied or been deceived is often objecting to the Bible as a way to indirectly cast doubt on God's existence. Well-placed questions such as these are good ways to dislodge threadbare slogans and get to the heart of the issue.

If you assume that God does not exist, then of course the authority of his Word seems like nonsense. However, if it is reasonable to believe that God does exist (and we will examine such evidence in subsequent chapters), then the "written by men" objection begs the question. If someone brings it up, ask, "Before we talk about the objection of the Bible being written by men, can I ask you this: Do you find the evidence of God's existence persuasive? Why or why not?"

Here's something else to consider. The Bible contains many fulfilled prophecies. Some of these are so specific that it defies imagination to think that they could have been written merely by human sources with no knowledge of the future. Evangelist D. James Kennedy tells a story about an encounter he had about fulfilled prophecy in the life of Jesus:

> **The Bible contains many fulfilled prophecies. Some of these are so specific that it defies imagination to think that they could have been written merely by human sources with no knowledge of the future.**

> Some time ago I had the opportunity to speak to a man who had no belief whatsoever in the Scriptures as any sort of divine revelation from God. He was a writer who was articulate and well-educated. While he was well-read, he was completely ignorant of any evidences for the truthfulness of the Christian faith and the Scriptures which reveal it. He said the Bible was simply a book written by men, just like any other book. I said, "That's very interesting. I would like to read some statements to you about someone and have you tell me, assuredly, without

<!-- page-69 -->

question, about whom did I read?" He replied, "Well, you obviously read of the life and ministry and suffering and death and resurrection of Jesus of Nazareth." I said, "Is there any question in your mind about that?" He answered, "No, that could refer to no one else." I replied, "Well then, I would want you to understand that all of the Scriptures I just read to you are taken from the Old Testament, which was completed some four hundred years before Jesus was born. No critic, no atheist, no agnostic has ever once claimed that any one of those writings was written after His birth. In fact, they were translated from Hebrew into Greek in Alexandria some 150 years before He was born. If this is merely a book written by men, would you please explain to me how these words were written?"<sup>53</sup>

From that point, Kennedy listed out twenty-four scriptural texts, including Isaiah 50:6, Zechariah 11:12–13, Psalm 22:16, Psalm 69:21, Isaiah 53:9, Exodus 12:46, Psalm 34:20, and Psalm 22:18.<sup>52</sup> He then continues his story:

> I said to him, "About whom did I read?" He replied, "Well, you obviously read of the life and ministry and suffering and death and resurrection of Jesus of Nazareth." I said, "Is there any question in your mind about that?" He answered, "No, that could refer to no one else." I replied, "Well then, I would want you to understand that all of the Scriptures I just read to you are taken from the Old Testament, which was completed some four hundred years before Jesus was born. No critic, no atheist, no agnostic has ever once claimed that any one of those writings was written after His birth. In fact, they were translated from Hebrew into Greek in Alexandria some 150 years before He was born. If this is merely a book written by men, would you please explain to me how these words were written?"<sup>53</sup>

A note of caution: a number of the prophecies Kennedy references were general in nature and had meaning at the time but in retrospect could also be applied to Jesus. Yet, even with this consideration in mind, the sheer weight of evidence has convinced many Bible scholars that it could not have been an accident. The Old Testament writers were led to write about something that could have made complete sense only when viewed backward through the lens of Jesus's life and work.

> **The Old Testament writers were led to write about something that could have made complete sense only when viewed backward through the lens of Jesus's life and work.**

**Objection 2: The Bible has been corrupted.** This objection is sometimes called the Telephone Game objection. Maybe you've played the game in which a person whispers a statement into a second person's ear, who then whispers it to a third, and so forth, until the last person says aloud what he was told. It's usually hilariously wrong, even bizarre. If we can't communicate one simple statement around a room with any accuracy, how is it possible for the Bible to have been transmitted accurately by hundreds of people over the course of thousands of years?

This objection is particularly important to Muslims who contend for the validity of the Quran based largely on the argument that the modern-day Bible has been cleansed of Islamic teachings and is therefore corrupted. Unfortunately for scholars of Islam, large portions of Old Testament texts, dating to and before the first century AD, illustrate that the texts we have are substantially the same as those Jesus and Paul had, making it difficult for Muslim scholars to argue that the Old Testament was corrupted sometime after Jesus's death.<sup>54</sup> If you get into a conversation with a Muslim acquaintance

<!-- page-70 -->

about this, ask, "If God can sustain the Quran throughout the ages, can he not sustain the biblical texts?" The evidence shows that he has preserved his Word.<sup>55</sup>

Muslim critics also like to argue that there are differences between the teachings of Jesus, whom they consider to be a prophet, and the apostle Paul, who they think corrupted Jesus's teachings.<sup>56</sup> Paul, however, is not so easily dismissed. He both introduces and concludes his letter to the Romans by noting how the gospel he proclaims stems from the Old Testament.<sup>57</sup> In fact, all throughout the New Testament we see affirmations of the Old Testament as inspired by God.<sup>58</sup> Paul also noted that "the Law and the Prophets" testified to the heart of the gospel—the righteousness of God (Rom. 3:21).<sup>59</sup> He taught that his ministry and message about Christ confirmed God's promises to the patriarchs: "I tell you that Christ became a servant to the circumcised to show God's truthfulness, in order to confirm the promises given to the patriarchs, and in order that the Gentiles might glorify God for his mercy" (Rom. 15:8–9).<sup>60</sup>

It is in fact true that we have no original manuscripts of the Old or the New Testaments. According to Jonathan Morrow, however, this isn't a serious objection to the validity of the texts we do possess.

> To begin with, you need to know that none of the original manuscripts of either the Old or New Testaments are still in existence—all that remain are imperfect copies. But this is exactly the same situation of all the other ancient works of literature as well. No one has the originals. While this may come as a surprise, this fact should not turn us into skeptics regarding ancient texts. But we do need to recognize how the composition and transmission of ancient documents worked.<sup>61</sup>

> **Other writings from antiquity are not seriously doubted (e.g., Aristotle, Livy, and so on), so why should the Bible be held to a different standard?**

Other writings from antiquity are not seriously doubted (e.g., Aristotle, Livy, and so on), so why should the Bible be held to a different standard?

Here's a more important question, though. In the absence of original manuscripts, do scholars have enough evidence to reconstruct the text? The authors of *Reinventing Jesus* say yes.

> The wealth of material that is available for determining the wording of the original New Testament is staggering: more than fifty-seven hundred Greek New Testament manuscripts, as many as twenty thousand versions, and more than one million quotations by patristic writers. In comparison with the average ancient Greek author, the New Testament copies are well over a thousand times more plentiful. If the average-sized manuscript were two and one-half inches thick, all the copies of the works of an average Greek author would stack up four feet high, while the copies of the New Testament would stack up to over a mile high! This is indeed an embarrassment of riches.<sup>62</sup>

Scholars of other ancient texts would love to have the "problem" New Testament scholars have.

<!-- page-71 -->

Still, if all these copies were duplicated over and over again, wouldn't mistakes accumulate over time, corrupting the text? To answer this question, we must understand the nature of copy mistakes. When scholars examine multiple manuscripts, they can compare them word by word, sentence by sentence. Often differences arise, called **textual variants**. And because we have so many manuscripts, the number of textual variants among the manuscripts is quite high. Skeptic Bart Ehrman refers quite often to four hundred thousand textual variants, so we will go with that number.

> *Textual Variants:* differences between particular words, phrases, or passages within multiple copies of the same ancient manuscript.

Essentially there are four kinds of textual variants:

1. Spelling and unclear readings

2. Changes that can't be translated, such as words that do not have an equivalent meaning in the language being translated into, or word order (e.g., "Christ Jesus" versus "Jesus Christ")

3. Meaningful variants that are not viable (i.e., variants that are just not plausible and occur in questionable manuscripts)

4. Meaningful and viable variants (i.e., variants that both are plausible and affect the meaning of the text)

The only variants of serious concern to biblical scholars are those in the fourth group because they are in trusted manuscripts and affect the meaning of the text. As Darrell Bock and Daniel Wallace summarize, though, "Less than one percent of all textual variants are both meaningful and viable, and by 'meaningful' we don't mean to imply earth-shattering significance but rather, almost always, minor alterations to the meaning of the text."<sup>63</sup> This comes out to fewer than four thousand of the original four hundred thousand variants having any real significance at all for the meaning of a verse. And none of these affects any core doctrines, according to Bock and Wallace.<sup>64</sup>

> **The bottom line is this: what we have in the New Testament today, with 99 percent accuracy, is essentially what was written then.**

The bottom line is this: what we have in the New Testament today, with 99 percent accuracy, is essentially what was written then. If this is so, the Telephone Game objection simply doesn't apply to New Testament texts. Wallace explains why:

> In the telephone game the goal is to garble an original utterance so that by the end of the line it doesn't resemble the original at all. There's only one line of transmission, it is oral rather than written, and the oral critic (the person who is trying to figure out what the original utterance was) only has the last person in line to interrogate. When it comes to the text of the NT, there are multiple lines of transmission, and

<!-- page-72 -->

the original documents were almost surely copied several times (which would best explain why they wore out by the end of the second century). Further, the textual critic doesn't rely on just the last person in the transmissional line, but can interrogate many scribes over the centuries, way back to the second century. And even when the early manuscript testimony is sparse, we have the early church fathers' testimony as to what the original text said. Finally, the process is not intended to be a parlor game but is intended to duplicate the original text faithfully—and this process doesn't rely on people hearing a whole utterance whispered only once, but seeing the text and copying it. The telephone game is a far cry from the process of copying manuscripts of the New Testament.<sup>65</sup>

Still, those who uphold the Telephone Game objection have played a valuable role in apologetics, pressing biblical scholars carefully to examine the evidence, which in turn has served to reinforce the Bible's trustworthiness.

**Objection 3: Important books have been left out of the Bible.** In 1945, fifty-two papyri were discovered at Nag Hammadi in Lower Egypt. Some of these texts had the word *gospel* in the title. Scholars have known about these and other second- through fourth-century documents for a long time, but in a culture that loves conspiracy theories and cover-ups, these so-called **Lost Gospels** make an irresistible story for investigative reports on television.

> *Lost Gospels:* a collection of fifty-two gnostic texts discovered in 1945 in Nag Hammadi, Egypt, and written sometime between the second and fourth centuries AD.

Why are these Lost Gospels excluded from the biblical canon? Generally speaking, there were three criteria used to decide which books were received as authoritative (that is, as Scripture):

1. **Apostolicity:** Was a book written by an apostle or an associate of an apostle? Mark was accepted because he was an associate of Peter, and Luke was accepted because of his relationship to Paul. Or to put it another way, if the book was not from the first century, it was not Scripture because it could not be historically connected to the apostles who were taught and commissioned by Jesus (who was crucified in AD 30–33).

2. **Orthodoxy:** Did this book conform to the teachings and theology of other books known by the apostles?<sup>66</sup>

3. **Pedigree:** Was the book accepted early on in the life of the church and by the majority of churches across the region? It was important that a book wasn't just accepted in one location but that lots of Christians in different cities and regions accepted it.<sup>67</sup>

Based on these criteria, the Lost Gospels, while historically interesting, are inferior to the canonical writings contained in the New Testament. The New Testament writings all date to the first century, when the apostles—or those who could have interviewed them—would have been alive.

<!-- page-73 -->

Here's something else of interest: there was a collection of texts *already* functioning as Scripture in the early church, long before the emperor Constantine could have decreed them as Scripture (as books such as Dan Brown's *The Da Vinci Code* claim). New Testament scholars Andreas Köstenberger and Michael Kruger summarize as follows:

> The concept of canon not only existed before the middle of the second century, but … a number of New Testament books were already received and being used as authoritative documents in the life of the church. Given the fact that such a trend is evident in a broad number of early texts—2 Peter, 1 Timothy, 1 Clement, the Didache, Ignatius, Polycarp, Barnabas, and Papias—we have good historical reasons to think that the concept of a New Testament canon was relatively well established and perhaps even a widespread reality by the turn of the century. Although the borders of the canon were not yet solidified by this time, there is no doubt that the early church understood that God had given a new set of authoritative covenant documents that testified to the redemptive work of Jesus Christ and that those documents were the beginning of the New Testament canon. Such a scenario provides a new foundation for how we view the historical evidence after c. AD 150. For example, the Muratorian Fragment reveals that by c. AD 180 the early church had received all four Gospels, all thirteen epistles of Paul, the book of Acts, Jude, the Johannine epistles (at least two of them), and the book of Revelation. Yet, in light of the evidence viewed here, some of these books had already been received and used long before the middle of the second century and viewed as part of the revelation of the new covenant (though we do not know how many). Thus, the Muratorian Fragment does not appear to be establishing or "creating" a canon but is expressly affirming what has already been the case within the early church.<sup>68</sup>

All of the extant "Lost" or "Missing" Gospels are from the second century or later; therefore, they are not our earliest and best sources. They fail the test of having been written by an apostle or produced through a direct interview with one.

Most important, the worldviews and theology of many of the Lost Gospels—such as the gospels of Thomas, Mary, Philip, and many others—are inconsistent with the teachings of earliest Christianity. Their theology is based on **gnosticism**, not orthodox Christianity.<sup>69</sup> Gnosticism taught that the world was made by a lesser divine being and that the material world and body were intrinsically evil. Because Jesus's appearing in a body would have corrupted his ministry, gnostics believed that Jesus was merely a spirit who *appeared* to be human. Gnostics taught that our main problem is ignorance, not sin, and that it is possible to gain "special knowledge" leading to salvation for those clever enough to decode it.<sup>70</sup> In short, these Lost Gospels teach a false gospel. The early church fathers therefore rejected them after careful study.<sup>71</sup> In spite of

> *Gnosticism:* a second-century heretical Christian movement that taught that the material world was created and maintained by a lesser divine being, that matter and the physical body are inherently evil, and that salvation can be obtained only through an esoteric knowledge of divine reality and the self-denial of physical pleasures.

<!-- page-74 -->

sensationalist claims in the media, these Lost Gospels were known in the early centuries after Christ's ministry and rejected for very good reasons.<sup>72</sup>

## 5. How Far Does God's Authority Extend?

If God actually exists and if the revelation about him is trustworthy, then he has authority. How far does this authority extend? The often neglected third verse of Isaac Watts's "Joy to the World" might help us here:

> No more let sins and sorrows grow,
> Nor thorns infest the ground;
> He comes to make His blessings flow
> Far as the curse is found,
> Far as the curse is found,
> Far as, far as, the curse is found.

How far did Watts think God's authority extends? As far as the curse is found, which is everywhere, as nothing in the world is untouched by human sin. South African scholar J. Norval Geldenhuys wrote,

> As Creator and Sustainer of the universe he has the absolute right over all created beings and an all-embracing authority in heaven as on earth. This final and supreme authority gives him the unlimited prerogative to command and enforce obedience, to unconditionally possess and absolutely govern all things at all times in all places of the universe.<sup>73</sup>

> *Derived Authority:* authority that has been ordained or permitted by God.

Because God created and sustains the universe, his authority is supreme over all. That means that all other legitimate authorities have **derived authority** (ordained or permitted by God).

If what we've seen so far is accurate, the authority of the Bible does not rest on the ponderous decision of some church council; its authority comes from God. Carl F. H. Henry explains,

> The classical view of inspiration refuses to ground the authority of Scripture in the common life of the community of faith; it correlates that authority instead with a divinely imparted property of the scriptural texts. Nor does it, as frequently charged, in any way reduce the issue of religious authority to a circular argument. The classic view discussed by general and special revelation, including scriptural authority, as objective factors.<sup>74</sup>

If the Bible is indeed from God to us, there is nothing that exists that escapes the authority of Scripture. Cultures, governments, life, death, family, entertainment—all are to be subjected

<!-- page-75 -->

Let's take a look at several areas subject to God's authority as revealed in Scripture.

**God has authority over the limits of reason.** Our worldview determines the limits and standards for what we would consider reasonable. A biblical worldview commits us to a view of reality larger than our ability to explain everything it contains. A biblical worldview means that God determines what is reasonable and what is not. For example, Abraham was willing to sacrifice his son Isaac because Abraham believed that God could raise Isaac from the dead, even though no miracles of resurrection had yet occurred in history.<sup>75</sup> Abraham's worldview was *enlarged* because "reasonable" for Abraham no longer merely included only natural possibilities but grew to also include the realm of supernatural. If God exists, then our definition of what is reasonable must expand by its very nature.

> **If God exists, then our definition of what is reasonable must expand by its very nature.**

**God has authority over our understanding of reality.** A biblical worldview commits us to a view of reality larger than our capacity to understand it. We tend to believe only what we can see or prove, but a biblical worldview includes spiritual entities (including God himself). Being finite and limited, we cannot see or touch some of the things Scripture describes, such as Satan, angels, and demons. Yet the Bible describes these as utterly real. Second Corinthians 4:18 says, "We look not to the things that are seen but to the things that are unseen. For the things that are seen are transient, but the things that are unseen are eternal." In talking about the armor of God, Ephesians 6:12 says, "We do not wrestle against flesh and blood, but against the rulers, against the authorities, against the cosmic powers over this present darkness, against the spiritual forces of evil in the heavenly places." The Old Testament tells of the prophet Elisha, who had so angered his enemies that they sent an army to capture him. Elisha's servant, Gehazi, was terrified until Elisha prayed that God would open his eyes to see the greater reality: that the king of Aram's mighty army was completely outnumbered by much more powerful spiritual forces (2 Kings 6:17).<sup>76</sup>

**God has authority over culture.** Time and again, in both testaments, believers are tempted to embrace the values and morals of the surrounding cultures, whether they were the Canaanites in the Old Testament or the Corinthians in the New Testament. Contrary to the practices of many cultures, though, following God meant obeying him. The prophets and apostles regularly confronted evil practices within their own cultures. These practices are not legitimized by them as "true for the culture that practiced them." Instead, the truths of Scripture are true for *all* cultures at *all* times. Postmodernists may say this is impossible, that cultures are too different, but Carl F. H. Henry disagrees: "Russians, Chinese, Koreans, and others have no problem learning the formulas of modern physics and the foreign languages in which implications are expounded for nuclear bombing and space shuttling. If scientists can communicate their ideas across cultural barriers, God certainly can do so."<sup>77</sup>

**God has authority over entertainment.** The voices of entertainers speak authoritatively over such wide-ranging issues as abortion, the environment, and spirituality—topics about

<!-- page-76 -->

which those entertainers have rarely been educated. And yet these voices are considered to be authoritative because millions of people listen to them and watch their videos on YouTube. Popularity, however, is not the same as authority. The number of people who believe an idea is rarely an indication in itself of the idea's truth. In a world where popularity is equated with being right, God claims authority over what voices we pay attention to and insists that we filter out what is not true or not worth thinking about (Phil. 4:8).<sup>78</sup>

**God has authority over our senses.** We've all been to enough magic shows to know that our senses can be deceived. We may see and hear things we think are true but are not. The Bible values our senses, given to us by God, as ways to know truth. The authority of the Bible extends beyond what we are able to verify with our senses. The Bible claims to be a reality check when our senses fail us. The apostle John wrote, "What was from the beginning, what we have heard, what we have *seen* with our eyes, what we have looked at and *touched* with our hands … testify and proclaim to you the eternal life" (1 John 1:1–3). Peter, for example, described being both an eyewitness and an "ear-witness" to the transfiguration of Jesus. These observations did not prove to him the truth of what he had seen but only served to "have the prophetic word more fully confirmed."<sup>79</sup>

> **The Bible claims to be a reality check when our senses fail us.**

**God has authority over our emotions.** God repeatedly expresses his authority over the emotional life. He commands that we love him and love others (Luke 10:27).<sup>80</sup> He even commands that we love our enemies and pray for them (Matt. 5:44).<sup>81</sup> Truth is not determined by our feelings. Truth is not determined by what makes us comfortable. Truth does not depend on how many people agree with us. Feelings can guide us to truth, but they can also mislead us. We may feel good about things that are untrue and bad about things that are true. As Flannery O'Connor said, "Truth does not change according to my ability to stomach it."<sup>82</sup>

> **God repeatedly expresses his authority over the emotional life.**

**God has authority over knowledge.** It is common for people to say, "I won't believe something unless it can be proven scientifically." They assume science to be the most reliable means of knowing. Later in this volume we will explore the topic of science and the Bible, but for now it is worth noting that to believe only what science can prove excludes anything any universally applicable truth, and even the underlying principles of science itself.<sup>83</sup> Half a century ago, Martyn Lloyd-Jones observed,

> If you study the history of science you will have much less respect for its supposed supreme authority than you had when you began. It is nothing but a simple fact of history that a hundred years ago and less, scientists were teaching dogmatically that glands were nothing but vestigial remains. They said that they had no value and no function whatsoever…. But today we know that these glands are essential to life.<sup>84</sup>

<!-- page-77 -->

The truth is, biblical writers were enabled by the Holy Spirit at times to "write better than they knew" and better than the science of that day could grasp.<sup>85</sup>

**God has authority over governments.** Psalm 2:1–6 says,

> Why do the nations rage,
>     and the peoples plot in vain?
> The kings of the earth set themselves,
>     and the rulers take counsel together,
> against the LORD and against his Anointed, saying,
>     "Let us burst their bonds apart
>     and cast away their cords from us."
> He who sits in the heavens laughs;
>     the Lord holds them in derision.
> Then he will speak to them in his wrath,
>     and terrify them in his fury, saying,
>     "As for me, I have set my King
>     on Zion, my holy hill."

Even the authority of nations is derived from and dependent on God (whether that authority is acknowledged or not) and, as revealed in the Bible, will accomplish God's purpose for all nations. In response to Pilate, Jesus said, "You would have no authority over me at all unless it had been given you from above" (John 19:11). Romans 13:1–2 says there is no authority except that which is from God.<sup>86</sup> Jesus specifically instructed his followers not to fear human authorities because they have only the capacity to destroy the body (Luke 12:4–5).<sup>87</sup> In Acts 5:29, when confronting unjust governmental authority, Peter and the other apostles say, "We must obey God rather than men." When governing authorities conflict with the authority of God, obedience is rendered to God alone.

> **When governing authorities conflict with the authority of God, obedience is rendered to God alone.**

Why? As Psalm 22:27–28 says, "All the ends of the earth shall remember and turn to the LORD, and all the families of the nations shall worship before you. For kingship belongs to the LORD, and he rules over the nations."

## 6. Conclusion

If every area of life falls under God's authority, God has the right to tell us what to do. We are told by Scripture to be stewards of our minds (Rom. 12:2; Eph. 4:23; Col. 3:2, 10),<sup>88</sup> our physical bodies (1 Cor. 6:12–20), our spouses (Eph. 5:18–33), and our children (Deut. 6:4–8).<sup>89</sup> We are told to be truthful and loving and not to gossip (Eph. 4:15, 25; James 1:19, 26)<sup>90</sup> and to be generous and hospitable to all people (Rom. 12:1–21). Biblical truth is not relative but absolute (John 17:17),<sup>91</sup> and Jesus is the only way to it (John 14:6; Acts 4:12).<sup>92</sup> Nothing is excluded. God's authority extends beyond what we can perceive with our senses to all areas of knowledge and over all human authority. God's worldview is bigger than ours. Will we live small, or will we live big?

<!-- page-78 -->

In the end, all people must decide where they will place their faith. When I get on an airplane, I put my faith in the pilots, the air traffic control system, physics, engineering, the maintenance crew, the integrity of the airplane's structure, the quality of the fuel company that refined and delivered the jet fuel, and an endless number of other people and factors. This is not blind faith; however; based on extensive experience, I trust the system designed to put airplanes safely in the air. Is it possible that my faith is misplaced? Yes. But no one can live apart from ongoing faith in the truths and systems we have come to trust as reliable.

Trust in the authority of Scripture is like trust in the airline system. It is not blind. God expresses his authority in Scripture, which we have good reason to believe, is both internally and externally trustworthy. Jesus claims authority, and the accuracy of biblical documents lends credence to his claim. Jesus also shows trust in the Old Testament revelation and lends his authority to those who later write the New Testament. Common objections to this trustworthiness only strengthen the Bible's claim to authority.

> **God expresses his authority in Scripture, which, we have good reason to believe, is both internally and externally trustworthy.**

And so we have come full circle. Bob Dylan was right: you gotta serve somebody. But whom? Some find they have a problem with authority. Others don't want to accept the lifestyle the Bible says is best for human flourishing. Others honestly search, but they doubt whether anyone can properly understand God's message as communicated through his Word. To grapple with these difficulties, we must understand more clearly what God is like. This is what we will discuss in chapter 4.

## Endnotes

<!-- page-78 -->

1. "Timothy James McVeigh: Executed June 11, 2001 at 7:14 a.m. CDT by Lethal Injection by U.S. Government at Terre Haute, Indiana," Clark Prosecutor, www.clarkprosecutor.org/html/death/US/mcveigh717.htm.
2. Often attributed to Benjamin Franklin.
3. See Romans 10:9: "If you confess with your mouth that Jesus is Lord and believe in your heart that God raised him from the dead, you will be saved"; Philippians 2:9–11: "God has highly exalted him and bestowed on him the name that is above every name, so that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, in heaven and on earth and under the earth, and every tongue confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father."
4. Romans 14:10–12: "Why do you pass judgment on your brother? Or you, why do you despise your brother? For we will all stand before the judgment seat of God; for it is written, 'As I live, says the Lord, every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue shall confess to God'"; Philippians 2:9–11: "God has highly exalted him and bestowed on him the name that is above every name, so that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, in heaven and on earth and under the earth, and every tongue confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father"; Isaiah 45:23: "By myself I have sworn; from my mouth has gone out in righteousness a word that will not return: 'To me every knee shall bow, every tongue shall swear allegiance.'"
5. The phrase "long obedience in the same direction" comes, ironically, from Friedrich Nietzsche, *Beyond Good and Evil* (New York: Millennium, 2014), 46. For his usage see *The Selected Writings of Friedrich Nietzsche* (Radford, VA: Wilder, 2008), 471. Eugene Peterson appropriates the term in his book *A Long Obedience in the Same Direction: Discipleship in an Instant Society* (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity, 2000) as a figure of speech for following Christ.
6. Matthew 22:37: "He said to him, 'You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your mind.'"
7. Romans 12:2: "Do not be conformed to this world, but be transformed by the renewal of your mind, that by testing you may discern what is the will of God, what is good and acceptable and perfect."
8. W. Gary Phillips, William E. Brown, and John Stonestreet, *Making Sense of Your World: A Biblical Worldview* (Salem,

<!-- page-79 -->

WI: Sheffield, 2008), 113.
9. John 8:58: "Jesus said to them, 'Truly, truly, I say to you, before Abraham was, I am.'"
10. John 10:30: "'I and the Father are one.'"
11. John 14:7–9: "If you had known me, you would have known my Father also. From now on you do know him and have seen him: Philip said to him, 'Lord, show us the Father, and it is enough for us.' Jesus said to him, 'Have I been with you so long, and you still do not know me, Philip? Whoever has seen me has seen the Father. How can you say, "Show us the Father"?'"
12. John 5:22: "The Father judges no one, but has given all judgment to the Son."
13. John 5:22. Jesus claimed authority over the following: to forgive sin (Mark 2:5), to perform miracles (Mark 2:8–12), to raise himself from the dead (John 2:19), over the angels (Matt. 13:41), over the kingdom of God (Matt. 26:63–65; John 5:22, 27).
14. Carl F. H. Henry, *God, Revelation and Authority*, vol. 4 (Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 1999), 68–69.
15. A popular movement called Red Letter Christians would probably take issue with this approach. The leader of the movement, a retired sociology professor named Tony Campolo, said in a response to an article in *Christianity Today*, "While we, like you, have a very high view of the inspiration of Scripture and believe the Bible was divinely inspired, you are correct in accusing Red Letter Christians of giving the words of Jesus priority over all other passages of Scripture. What is more, we believe that you really cannot rightly interpret the rest of the Bible without first understanding who Jesus is, what he did, and what he said." Campolo goes on to distinguish between the teachings of Jesus and the teachings of the Old Testament. Sam Guthrie, "When Red Is Blue: Why I Am Not a Red-Letter Christian," *Christianity Today*, October 11, 2007, www.christianitytoday.com/ct/2007/october/33.100.html. My point is that this is a distinction Jesus himself did not make.
16. W. Gary Phillips, research provided to the author, April 16, 2013.
17. Matthew 22:41–45: "Now while the Pharisees were gathered together, Jesus asked them a question, saying, 'What do you think about the Christ? Whose son is he?' They said to him, 'The son of David.' He said to them, 'How is it then that David, in the Spirit, calls him Lord, saying, "The Lord said to my Lord, sit at my right hand, until I put your enemies under your feet"? If then David calls him Lord, how is he his son?'" In reference to Psalm 110:1, "The LORD says to my Lord: 'Sit at my right hand, until I make your enemies your footstool.'"
18. John 10:34–36: "Jesus answered them, 'Is it not written in your Law, "I said, you are gods"? If he called them gods to whom the word of God came—and Scripture cannot be broken—do you say of him whom the Father consecrated and sent into the world, "You are blaspheming," because I said, "I am the Son of God"?'" In reference to Psalm 82:6, "I said, 'You are gods, sons of the Most High, all of you.'"
19. Matthew 5:17: "Do not think that I have come to abolish the Law or the Prophets; I have not come to abolish them but to fulfill them."
20. Luke 24:44: "Then he said to them, 'These are my words that I spoke to you while I was still with you, that everything written about me in the Law of Moses and the Prophets and the Psalms must be fulfilled.'"
21. Matthew 27:46: "About the ninth hour Jesus cried out with a loud voice, saying, 'Eli, Eli, lema sabachthani?' that is, 'My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?'"
22. Henry, *God, Revelation and Authority*, vol. 4, 51.
23. 2 Peter 3:16: "As he does in all his letters when he speaks in them of these matters. There are some things in them that are hard to understand, which the ignorant and unstable twist to their own destruction, as they do the other Scriptures."
24. 1 Timothy 5:18: "For the Scripture says, 'You shall not muzzle the ox when it treads out grain,' and, 'The laborer deserves his wages.'"
25. Kenneth A. Kitchen, *Ancient Orient and the Old Testament* (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity, 1975), 30–32. Kitchen's particular point had to do with archaeological evidence, but the principle he stated so cleverly applies generally to the investigation of historical claims, too.
26. Philip R. Davies, *In Search of 'Ancient Israel': A Study in Biblical Origins* (Sheffield, England: Sheffield Academic Press, 1992), 12.
27. Quoted in Jeffery Sheler, *Is the Bible True? How Modern Debates and Discoveries Affirm the Essence of the Scriptures* (San Francisco: Harper Collins, 1999), 96.
28. Edward Lane, "King David's Temple Found by Archaeologists in Israel," *The Examiner*, July 20, 2013, www.examiner.com/article/king-david-s-temple-found-by-archaeologists-israel.
29. Sheler, *Is the Bible True?*, 254.
30. Genesis 11:28: "Haran died in the presence of his father Terah in the land of his kindred, in Ur of the Chaldeans"; Genesis 10:10: "The beginning of his kingdom was Babel, Erech, Accad, and Calneh, in the land of Shinar."
31. Genesis 12:6: "Abram passed through the land to the place at Shechem, to the oak of Moreh. At that time the Canaanites were in the land."
32. Genesis 20:1: "From there Abraham journeyed toward the territory of the Negeb and lived between Kadesh and Shur; and he sojourned in Gerar."
33. Exodus 1:11: "They set taskmasters over them to afflict them with heavy burdens. They built for Pharaoh store cities,

<!-- page-80 -->

Pithom and Raamses."
34. As one example, Joshua 10:34–35: "Then Joshua and all Israel with him passed on from Lachish to Eglon. And they laid siege to it and fought against it. And they captured it on that day, and struck it with the edge of the sword. And he devoted every person in it to destruction that day, as he had done to Lachish."
35. As one example, Joshua 19:35: "The fortified cities are Ziddim, Zer, Hammath, Rakkath, Chinnereth."
36. R. K. Harrison, *Introduction to the Old Testament* (Peabody, MA: Hendrickson, 2004), 127.
37. Harrison, *Introduction to the Old Testament*, 128. See also Victor Matthews, *Old Testament Parallels: Laws and Stories from the Ancient Near East*, 3rd ed. (Mahwah, NJ: Paulist, 2007), 137–38.
38. Harrison, *Introduction to the Old Testament*, 128.
39. Harrison, *Introduction to the Old Testament*, 128. See also Matthews, *Old Testament Parallels*, 137–38.
40. 2 Kings 24:10: "At that time the servants of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came up to Jerusalem, and the city was besieged."
41. 2 Kings 24:17: "The king of Babylon made Mattaniah, Jehoiachin's uncle, king in his place, and changed his name to Zedekiah."
42. 2 Kings 24:13: "… and carried off all the treasures of the house of the LORD and the treasures of the king's house, Zedekiah. He carried away all Jerusalem and all the officials and all the mighty men of valor, 10,000 captives, and all the craftsmen and the smiths. None remained, except the poorest people of the land. And he carried away Jehoiachin to Babylon. The king's mother, the king's wives, his officials, and the chief men of the land he took into captivity from Jerusalem to Babylon. And the king of Babylon brought captive to Babylon all the men of valor, 7,000, and the craftsmen and the metal workers, 1,000, all of them strong and fit for war." See Matthews, *Old Testament Parallels*, 141–43.
43. K. A. Kitchen, *On the Reliability of the Old Testament* (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 2003).
44. Quoted in Michael J. Wilkens and J. P. Moreland, *Jesus Under Fire: Modern Scholarship Reinvents the Historical Jesus* (Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 1995), 221–22.
45. Second, because of Acts, our best source to aim at historical and archaeological authentication. New Testament scholar F. F. Bruce, in his book *The New Testament Documents: Are They Reliable?* (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 1981), collected a remarkable listing of historical affirmations (having to do with terminology and titles) that begin with the first missionary journey in Acts 13, all of which validate the historical accuracy of the only "history book" of the early church. The reason these examples are significant is that there is no way someone would have known these details unless they had traveled to the cities that are described.
    - Acts 13:7—Cyprus became a senatorial province (as opposed to "imperial" province) in 22 BC, and thus the governor was rightly called "proconsul" Sergius Paulus.
    - Acts 13:2, 20ff., 35ff.—"Praetors" (magistrates of Philippi) were attended by "Lictors" (sergeants, with whose rods Paul and Silas were beaten—these titles are confirmed by the Roman writer Cicero).
    - Acts 17:6, 9—At Thessalonica, the term *politarchs* (found in no other city) was corroborated by an inscription discovered at Thessalonica.
    - Acts 18:12—Achaia had been a senatorial province only since AD 44, thus the term *proconsul* for Gallio, who had arrived in July of AD 51, is entirely accurate.
    - Acts 18:12—At Ephesus, the term *town clerk* referred to a local official who acted as a link between municipal government and Roman administration; also, the term *Asiarchs* is also accurate, referring to chief priests of the "Rome and the Emperor" cult from throughout the province, who would have been in Ephesus to represent the emperor during the festival of Artemis.
    - Acts 19:35—Also at Ephesus, the term *Warden of the Temple* is confirmed in an inscription describing the city of Ephesus as the "Temple-Warden" of Artemis.
    - Acts 19:38—Finally at Ephesus, the term *proconsuls* (plural) was challenged by liberal critics because elsewhere there was only one proconsul at a time. But proconsul Junius Silanus had been assassinated a few months before the Ephesian riot by messengers from Agrippina, the mother of Nero. Nero had just become emperor in AD Rome. Within this window of time, the events in Acts 19 took place.
    - Acts 28:7—The title of the ruler of Malta was "first man of the island," which is corroborated by both Greek and Latin inscriptions. Dr. Bruce cites the confusing way an Oxford University student refers to the heads of Oxford colleges by their proper titles: Provost of Oriel, Master of Lalliol, Rector of Exeter, President of Magdalen, and so on. These titles are very difficult for someone in another part of academia even within the United Kingdom, and historically, the events of the Old Testament and the events of the New Testament (Gospels—the life of Christ; Acts—the spread of Christianity) took place just as the authoritative words of the Word of God claim.
46. Acts 19:38: "If therefore Demetrius and the craftsmen with him have a complaint against anyone, the courts are open, and there are proconsuls. Let them bring charges against one another."
47. Bruce, *New Testament Documents*, 84.
48. John P. Meier, *A Marginal Jew: Rethinking the Historical Jesus*, vol. 2, *Mentor, Message, and Miracles* (New York: Doubleday, 1994).
49. Graham H. Twelftree, *Jesus the Miracle Worker: A Historical and Theological Study* (Downers Grove, IL: IVP Academic, 1999), chaps. 1–2.
50. Gregory Koukl, *Tactics: A Game Plan for Discussing Your Christian Convictions* (Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2009), 44.
51. D. James Kennedy, "Christ: The Fulfillment of Prophecy," in Ted Cabal et al., eds., *The Apologetics Study Bible* (Nashville: B&H, 2007), xxviii–xxix.
52. Isaiah 50:6: "I gave my back to those who strike, and my cheeks to those who pull out the beard; I hid not my face from disgrace and spitting"; Zechariah 11:12–13, "Then I said to them, 'If it seems good to you, give me my wages; but if not, keep them.' And they weighed out as my wages thirty pieces of silver. Then the LORD said to me, 'Throw it to the potter'—the lordly price at which I was priced by them. So I took the thirty pieces of silver and threw them into the house of the LORD, to the potter"; Psalm 22:16: "Dogs encompass me; a company of evildoers encircles me; they have pierced my hands and feet"; Psalm 69:21: "They gave me poison for food, and for my thirst they gave me sour wine to drink"; Isaiah 53:9: "They made his grave with the wicked and with a rich man in his death, although he had done no violence, and there was no deceit in his mouth"; Exodus 12:46: "It shall be eaten in one house; you shall not take any of the flesh outside the house, and you shall not break any of its bones"; Psalm 34:20: "He keeps all his bones; not one of them is broken"; and Psalm 22:18: "They divide my garments among them, and for my clothing they cast lots."
53. Kennedy, "Christ: The Fulfillment of Prophecy."
54. See Walter C. Kaiser, *Are the Old Testament Documents Reliable and Relevant?* (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity, 2001).
55. See Norman L. Geisler and William E. Nix, *A General Introduction to the Bible*, rev. ed. (Chicago: Moody, 1986).
56. See, for example, Mohd Elfie Nieshaem Juferi, "Paul of Tarsus: The False Apostle according to Islam," Bismika Allahuma, www.bismikallahuma.org/archives/2005/paul-of-tarsus-the-false-apostle-according-to-islam/. In response, see David Wenham's books *Paul: Follower of Jesus or Founder of Christianity?* (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 1995) and *Paul and Jesus: The True Story* (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 2002).
57. See Romans 1:1–2: "Paul, a servant of Christ Jesus, called to be an apostle, set apart for the gospel of God, which he promised beforehand through his prophets in the holy Scriptures"; Romans 16:25–27: "Now to him who is able to strengthen you according to my gospel and the preaching of Jesus Christ, according to the revelation of the mystery that was kept secret for long ages but has now been disclosed and through the prophetic writings has been made known to all nations, according to the command of the eternal God, to bring about the obedience of faith—to the only wise God be glory forevermore through Jesus Christ! Amen"; Galatians 3:6–8: "Just as Abraham 'believed God, and it was counted to him as righteousness'? Know then that it is those of faith who are the sons of Abraham. And the Scripture, foreseeing that God would justify the Gentiles by faith, preached the gospel beforehand to Abraham, saying, 'In you shall all the nations be blessed.'"
58. See 2 Timothy 3:14–17: "As for you, continue in what you have learned and have firmly believed, knowing from whom you learned it and how from childhood you have been acquainted with the sacred writings, which are able to make you wise for salvation through faith in Christ Jesus. All Scripture is breathed out by God and profitable for teaching, for reproof, for correction, and for training in righteousness, that the man of God may be complete, equipped for every good work." The Old Testament prophets are acknowledged to have been inspired (1 Pet. 2:21; cf. 2 Sam. 23:2). Furthermore, both the Old and New Testaments contain divine declarations that God's Word will not pass away (Isa. 40:6–8; 1 Pet. 1:24–25). Jesus confirmed the truthfulness of the Old Testament in the Sermon on the Mount (Matt. 5–7, especially 5:17–18) and elsewhere (Luke 16:31; 24:27; John 10:35; 17:17). For more information and examples, see John W. Wenham, *Christ and the Bible* (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker, 1984).
59. Romans 3:21: "Now the righteousness of God has been manifested apart from the law, although the Law and the Prophets bear witness to it."
60. Even though some of his contemporaries charged Paul with being unlawful (Rom. 3:8; 6:1, 15), he denied their accusations: "Do we, then, nullify the law by this faith? Not at all! Rather, we uphold the law" (Rom. 3:31). He even viewed himself and his congregations as accountable to the Old Testament Scriptures, noting that they have a continuing validity for the church as the people of God: "Whatever was written in former days was written for our instruction, that through endurance and through the encouragement of the Scriptures we might have hope" (Rom. 15:4; also 4:23–24; 1 Cor. 10:1). Paul's dependence on the Old Testament is amply verified by his many explicit quotations he culled from the law, the writings, and the prophets (Rom. 3:10–18; 10:5–21; 15:8–12) as well as his innumerable allusions to the Old Testament. For more information, see Gerald F. Hawthorne and Ralph P. Martin, eds., *Dictionary of Paul and His Letters* (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity, 1993), 630–42; Ben Witherington, *Paul's Narrative Thought World: The Tapestry of Tragedy and Triumph* (Nashville: Westminster/John Knox, 1994); and the relevant discussions in Gregory K. Beale, ed., *Right Doctrine from the Wrong Texts? Essays on the Use of the Old Testament in the New* (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker, 1996).
61. Jonathan Morrow, *Welcome to College: A Christ-Follower's Guide for the Journey* (Grand Rapids, MI: Kregel, 2010), 1230.
62. J. Ed Komoszewski, M. James Sawyer, and Daniel B. Wallace, *Reinventing Jesus: How Contemporary Skeptics Miss the Real Jesus and Mislead Popular Culture* (Grand Rapids, MI: Kregel, 2006), 82.
63. Darrell L. Bock and Nelson, 2007), 60.
64. Daniel B. Wallace, *Dethronging Jesus*, 60–72.
65. Daniel B. Wallace, "An Interview with Daniel B. Wallace on the New Testament Manuscripts," by Justin Taylor, The Gospel Coalition, March 21, 2012, thegospelcoalition.org/blogs/justintaylor/2012/03/21/an-interview-with-daniel-b-wallace-on-the-new-testament-manuscripts/.
66. Strikingly, the apostle Paul applied his strict criterion for biblical knowledge and truth to his own writings. In fact, he proclaimed that if his own future writings deviated from the inspired truth already received from God, they should be rejected. In his letter to the Galatians, Paul wrote, "I would have you know, brothers, that the gospel that was preached by me is not man's gospel. For I did not receive it from any man, nor was I taught it, but I received it through a revelation of Jesus Christ" (1:11–12). This is significant because Paul had just made this declaration: "Even if we or an angel from heaven should preach to you a gospel contrary to the one we preached to you, let him be accursed!" (v. 8).
67. This is summarized from Jonathan Morrow's article "How Do We Know the Bible Includes the Right Books?" in *The Apologetics Study Bible for Students*, ed. Sean McDowell (Nashville: B&H, 2010), 1230.
68. Andreas J. Kostenberger and Michael J. Kruger, *The Heresy of Orthodoxy: How Contemporary Culture's Fascination with Diversity Has Reshaped Our Understanding of Early Christianity* (Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2010), 149–50.
69. See Marvin Meyer, *The Gnostic Gospels of Jesus: The Definitive Collection of Mystical Gospels and Secret Books about Jesus of Nazareth* (New York: HarperOne, 2005).
70. See, for example, Dan Graves, "Gnosticism," Christianity, www.christianity.com/church/church-history/timeline/1-300/gnosticism-11629621.html.
71. The writings of many of the church fathers are still available in printed form if you would like to study their arguments in more detail. For example, see *Against Heresies* by St. Irenaeus of Lyons, Project Gutenberg, self.gutenberg.org/article/WHEBN0000015411/IrenaeusofScripture.
72. For detailed information on how the books of the Bible were carefully selected, see F. F. Bruce, *The Canon of Scripture* (Downers Grove, IL: IVP Academic, 1996).
73. J. Norval Geldenhuys, "Authority and the Bible," in *Revelation and the Bible: Contemporary Evangelical Thought*, ed. Carl F. H. Henry (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker, 1958), 371–86.
74. Henry, *God, Revelation and Authority*, vol. 4, 93–94.
75. See Hebrews 11:17–19: "By faith Abraham, when he was tested, offered up Isaac, and he who had received the promises was in the act of offering up his only son, of whom it was said, 'Through Isaac shall your offspring be named.' He considered that God was able even to raise him from the dead, from which, figuratively speaking, he did receive him back."
76. 2 Kings 6:17: "Then Elisha prayed and said, 'O LORD, please open his eyes that he may see.' So the LORD opened the eyes of the young man, and he saw, and behold, the mountain was full of horses and chariots of fire all around Elisha."
77. Henry, *God, Revelation and Authority*, vol. 4, 115.
78. Philippians 4:8: "Finally, brothers, whatever is true, whatever is honorable, whatever is just, whatever is pure, whatever is lovely, whatever is commendable, if there is any excellence, if there is anything worthy of praise, think about these things."
79. 2 Peter 1:16–21: "We did not follow cleverly devised myths when we made known to you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but we were eyewitnesses of his majesty. For when he received honor and glory from God the Father, and the voice was borne to him by the Majestic Glory, 'This is my beloved Son, with whom I am well pleased,' we ourselves heard this very voice borne from heaven, for we were with him on the holy mountain. And we have the prophetic word more fully confirmed, to which you will do well to pay attention as to a lamp shining in a dark place, until the day dawns and the morning star rises in your hearts, knowing this first of all, that no prophecy of Scripture comes from someone's own interpretation. For no prophecy was ever produced by the will of man, but men spoke from God as they were carried along by the Holy Spirit." See also Acts 22:9; John 12:27–30.
80. Luke 10:27: "He answered, 'You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your strength and with all your mind, and your neighbor as yourself.'"
81. Matthew 5:44: "I say to you, Love your enemies and pray for those who persecute you."
82. Flannery O'Connor, *The Habit of Being: Letters of Flannery O'Connor*, ed. Sally Fitzgerald (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1979), 100.
83. On this, Carl F. H. Henry says, "Only on the basis of the scriptural witness … do we know that God is creator ex nihilo of heaven and earth and is lord of the whole universe; no view of origins or principle of universal applicability can be established empirically. Since its teaching centers in supraempirical realities, much of what the Bible teaches cannot be empirically demonstrated. To replace scriptural authority with some rival authority-principle abridges historic Christian commitments in respect to Scripture as the supreme rule of faith and practice" (*God, Revelation and Authority*, vol. 4, 43).
84. David Martyn Lloyd-Jones, *Authority* (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity, 1958), 40.
85. A good example, proposed by Alva J. McClain, is of God's revelation to Abram that his offspring would be as numerous

<!-- page-82 -->

as the stars in the sky (Gen. 15:5). To us, because we know there are billions of stars, that claim would be a good example of hyperbole that communicates a vast number of descendants. But for Abram, in that day, the promise would have seemed lame. There are only about four thousand stars visible to the naked eye even on a level horizon on the clearest night. But later, when the same promise was repeated, Abram was told that his descendants would be as the stars in the sky and "as the sand which is on the seashore" (Gen. 22:17). To Abram that would have seemed a much greater promise; to us a few hundred years after Galileo invented the telescope, we know the comparisons to be equivalent. God spoke (and that promise was recorded for us) better than any scientist of his day could have understood. See Alva J. McClain, *The Greatness of the Kingdom: An Inductive Study of the Kingdom of God* (Winona Lake, IN: BMH Books, 2001).
86. Romans 13:1–2: "Let every person be subject to the governing authorities. For there is no authority except from God, and those that exist have been instituted by God. Therefore whoever resists the authorities resists what God has appointed, and those who resist will incur judgment."
87. Luke 12:4–5: "I tell you, my friends, do not fear those who kill the body, and after that have nothing more that they can do. But I will warn you whom to fear: fear him who, after he has killed, has authority to cast into hell. Yes, I tell you, fear him!"
88. Romans 12:2: "Do not be conformed to this world"; Ephesians 4:23: "To be renewed in the spirit of your minds"; Colossians 3:2: "Set your minds on things that are above, not on things that are on earth"; Colossians 3:10: "Have put on the new self, which is being renewed in knowledge after the image of its creator."
89. Deuteronomy 6:4–8: "Hear, O Israel: The LORD our God, the LORD is one. You shall love the LORD your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your might. And these words that I command you today shall be on your heart. You shall teach them diligently to your children, and shall talk of them when you sit in your house, and when you walk by the way, and when you lie down, and when you rise. You shall bind them as a sign on your hand, and they shall be as frontlets between your eyes."
90. Ephesians 4:15: "Speaking the truth in love, we are to grow up in every way into him who is the head, into Christ"; Ephesians 4:25: "Having put away falsehood, let each one of you speak the truth with his neighbor, for we are members one of another"; James 1:19: "Know this, my beloved brothers: let every person be quick to hear, slow to speak, slow to anger"; James 1:26: "If anyone thinks he is religious and does not bridle his tongue but deceives his heart, this person's religion is worthless."
91. John 17:17: "Sanctify them in the truth; your word is truth."
92. John 14:6: "Jesus said to him, 'I am the way, and the truth, and the life. No one comes to the Father except through me'"; Acts 4:12: "There is salvation in no one else, for there is no other name under heaven given among men by which we must be saved."
