<!-- page-85 -->
# What the Bible Says about God

## 1. God Is "Back"

Despite the mockery from **New Atheism** and some comedians and despite having been exiled from public schools, strong faith in God is making a comeback. "Almost everywhere you look, from the suburbs of Dallas to the slums of Sao Paulo to the back streets of Bradford," say John

<!-- page-86 -->
Micklethwait and Adrian Wooldridge, editors of *The Economist* magazine, "you can see religion returning to public life."¹

> **New Atheism:** a contemporary form of atheism that not only denies the existence of God but also contends that religion should be vehemently criticized, condemned, and opposed.

In fact, the religions and denominations requiring commitment to stringent doctrines are growing faster than the "easy" religions, even among the upwardly mobile, educated middle classes.² Even among younger people or political liberals, who typically proclaim higher levels of unbelief, the percentage of those who claim belief in God is around 85 percent.³ It's enough to give New Atheists such as Richard Dawkins indigestion.

What people mean when they say they believe in God, though, requires some teasing out. As Baylor University sociologists Paul Froese and Christopher Bader have discovered, Americans usually fall into one of four God-belief categories based on whether they understand God to be engaged or disengaged in the world, and judgmental or nonjudgmental.

- 31 percent believe in an *authoritative* God who is both engaged and judgmental. These Americans see God as a caring father figure who can also become angry and act on his anger.⁴
- 24 percent believe in a *benevolent* God who is engaged and nonjudgmental. These Americans see God as "a kind of all-powerful and ever-present life coach."⁵
- 16 percent believe in a *critical* God who is disengaged and judgmental. Say Froese and Bader, "These believers think that God's displeasure will be felt in another life but that divine justice will not be meted out in this world."⁶
- 24 percent believe in a *distant* God who is disengaged and nonjudgmental. "They view God as a cosmic force that set the laws of nature in motion but does not really 'do' things in the world or hold clear opinions about our activities or world events."⁷

How people view God both affects and is affected by the way they live. Conservatives are more likely to believe in an authoritative God, whereas liberals are more likely to believe in a distant God.⁸ Those who believe in an authoritative God are more likely to say that adultery, gay marriage, and abortion are always wrong, whereas those who believe in a distant God are more likely to say that such activities are not wrong at all.⁹ People who believe that God is authoritative or benevolent are less likely to believe that science can solve human problems and less likely to believe that humans evolved from primates but also more likely to view science as revealing God's glory.¹⁰

How people view God is a reflection of how they view life. As Froese and Bader put it, "It is when a person talks about God, instead of herself, that she reveals the most."¹¹ We can truly say that everyone is, in a sense, a theologian. We all have thoughts about who God is, and those thoughts affect our lives.

<!-- page-87 -->
What are these thoughts based on, though? If Scripture has authority, as we discussed in the previous chapter, then we need to see what Scripture reveals about who God is. In this chapter, we'll talk first about what it means that we are all theologians and whether there is even a point in trying to discover who an infinite God is. We'll then look at who God reveals himself to be, his attributes, and his nature as Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. This is a lot to study. I pray that rather than being overwhelmed by details and rationalistic thoughts about God, you'll be captivated by his awesomeness and how he cares for us personally.

## 2. What It Means to Be a Theologian

Although we are all theologians, we might be good ones or bad ones. Still, all of us, even atheists, think about God. We cannot *not* contemplate life's biggest questions. We are curious beings, hungry for answers, and we somehow know that these answers do not come merely from our physical circumstances. As the Preacher said, God "has put eternity into man's heart" (Eccles. 3:11).

We shouldn't make our goal, however, merely thinking accurately about God or avoiding disobedience. Instead, we should *love* him with all of our minds and hearts, as Jesus stated in Matthew 22:37.¹² Loving God, we will want to know his thoughts and values. We ought to think God's thoughts after him and turn our hearts toward what he says. The best theology is more than an academic discipline; it is a way of loving, knowing, and cherishing God.¹³ Good theology is an act of worship, and of the very highest sort.

Good theology also reminds people of what is really true. Prominent Christian cleric Richard John Neuhaus is spot-on:

> It is the responsibility and the opportunity of Christians to communicate to the world what is aptly called "the world's own story." The world does not know its own story. The story of God's creating love; His preparing redemption for the world; His calling a chosen people and from this people raising up a Redeemer, the Messiah; His establishing an Apostolic community of faith, the Church, that would then reach out through all times and all places and all languages and cultures. This story bearing the promise of the *telos*—of the end—the destiny of the Cosmos itself and God's loving purposes for the world that He so loved that He gave His only begotten Son. This is the story of the world. It is the story of everybody in the world. Our job is to alert people to their own story and to help them understand that everything that goes on in this world, all the dimensions of human activity—if they are rightfully ordered, if they are rightfully understood—are sacred, for they are all endowed with the presence of the God of creating and redeeming love who continues to be disposed to His creation, of which He once said, "Behold it is very good." So also He invites a return to that goodness and a fulfillment of that goodness in Jesus Christ. We have to share God's love for the world. To have a Christian world view is to love the world.¹⁴

<!-- page-88 -->
God's story—this incredibly good news—straightens what sin has bent, uncovers the treasure of meaning that often goes buried and forgotten, and assures us of love that we, fearing disappointment, dared not hope for.

God is really God, his goodness is really good, and his truth is really true. But as we've already seen, people disagree about what God is like, and their beliefs about him affect everything. Preacher and author A. W. Tozer once said, "What comes into our minds when we think about God is the most important thing about us."¹⁵ If God is who he claims to be in the Bible, the Bible's answers to life's biggest questions are worth paying attention to. A true picture of God will lead to real life and help us avoid the counterfeit gods vying for our affections.

What do people imagine when they think of God? Well, for 53 percent of people surveyed, God is not a person but a "cosmic force."¹⁶ Obviously, people could mean by this that God has no human form. But we must be careful about what terms we employ. Cosmic forces cannot tell you what to do or judge you, but neither can they love or rescue you. They can't even really be a "they." A person who thinks God is a cosmic force will likely never grasp what it means to bear God's image. It may seem innocuous enough to be mistaken about who God is, but these mistakes can lead to crippling doubt. As English author Os Guinness states,

> Believers get into their heads such a wrong idea of God that it comes between them and God or between them and their trusting God. Since they do not recognize what they are doing, they blame God rather than their faulty picture, little realizing that God is not like that at all. Unable to see God as he is, they cannot trust him as they should, and doubt is the result.¹⁷

> Properly understanding God can help us find answers to life's big questions.

Properly understanding God can help us find answers to life's big questions. Humans wrestle with where we come from, the meaning of life, our purpose on earth, how we should live, and where we are going. If God "is there and he is not silent,"¹⁸ as Francis Schaeffer put it, we might actually find trustworthy answers to these perplexing questions. But this can happen only if we discover and come to know the present, communicating creator of life and the good news he proclaims.

But can we actually *know* him?

## 3. Can Finite Human Beings Really Know an Infinite God?

Before we get too far ahead of ourselves, though, let's define what we mean when we use the word *God*. This is tricky because our ability to understand God is limited; surely, then, he is greater than our definitions. It is a paradox considered by a Benedictine monk and philosopher nearly a thousand years ago, Anselm of Canterbury. Anselm defined God as "that than which none greater can be conceived."¹⁹ This **Perfect Being Theology** says we must think of God as "the greatest possible being, an individual exhibiting maximal perfection."²⁰ God is, by his very nature, everything it is better to be than not to be.

> **Perfect Being Theology:** a view of God formulated by Anselm of Canterbury that defines God as "the greatest possible being" and "that than which none greater can be conceived."

<!-- page-89 -->
Believers often fall into the trap of thinking that because they don't know *everything* about God that therefore they cannot know *anything* about God. It isn't true. One commonly used thought exercise that I've conducted with students is to draw a circle representing everything that can be known. Then draw a circle inside the circle representing what you personally know. Everyone reaches the same conclusion. They draw a very big circle for everything that can be known and a very tiny circle representing what they personally know. As Jonathan Morrow phrases it,

While we cannot know God *exhaustively*, we can know him *truly*. The finite human mind cannot fully comprehend the nature of an infinite God (even in heaven), but we can grow in our understanding and experience of God as he has *revealed* himself in Creation, Scripture, and through Jesus Christ.²¹

> We must humbly acknowledge the truth: we simply don't have the *capacity* to understand God exhaustively.

In order to grow in this kind of understanding, obviously, we must humbly acknowledge the truth: we simply don't have the *capacity* to understand God exhaustively. As this famous passage from Augustine reminds us,

> We are speaking of God. Is it any wonder if you do not comprehend? For if you comprehend, it is not God you comprehend. Let it be a pious confession of ignorance rather than a rash profession of knowledge. To attain some slight knowledge of God is a great blessing; to comprehend him, however, is totally impossible.²²

Augustine is not saying that we cannot know anything about God; he's saying that what we actually know about him pales in comparison to what he actually is. This is similar to what the apostle Paul says in Romans 11:33: "Oh, the depth of the riches and wisdom and knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his judgments and how inscrutable his ways!"

Yet while we marvel at how far God is above our understanding, Scripture also assumes we can know God well enough to bring him delight:

> Thus says the LORD: "Let not the wise man boast in his wisdom, let not the mighty man boast in his might, let not the rich man boast in his riches, but let him who boasts boast in this, that he understands and knows me, that I am the LORD who practices steadfast love, justice, and righteousness in the earth. For in these things I delight," declares the LORD. (Jer. 9:23–24)

Not only can we know God to his satisfaction, but we can know him well enough to obey: "The secret things belong to the LORD our God, but the things that are revealed belong to us and to our children forever, that we may do all the words of this law" (Deut. 29:29).

We can be confident that we can know God truthfully only because he has chosen to reveal himself. Had God intended to remain hidden from us, we would be unable to know him at all. Instead, however, God wants to be known and, through revelation, enables us to know him.

<!-- page-90 -->
God has chosen to reveal himself in how he created the world and by giving us the Scriptures. However, the fullest way we know God, according to Hebrews 1:1–2, is through Jesus Christ: "Long ago, at many times and in many ways, God spoke to our fathers by the prophets, but in these last days he has spoken to us by his Son, whom he appointed the heir of all things, through whom also he created the world."

> God reveals himself both by what he does and who he is: he wants to be known.

God reveals himself both by what he does and who he is: he wants to be known. With this in mind, let's search the Scriptures to understand more clearly some of God's nature and characteristics. Although an infinite God is ultimately beyond reason, our understanding of him can still be reasonable, and Scripture can show us how to understand him as he wants to be understood. We'll need to define our terms and shun sloppy thinking, but in the end we will be able to understand more of who God is—and worship him better—as a result.

## 4. Who God Reveals Himself to Be

In Scripture, God reveals three aspects of his nature that we'll now examine. God is self-existent, God is spirit, and God is personal.

**1. God is self-existent.** Theologians use the word **aseity** (from the Latin *a se*, "from oneself") to describe God's self-sufficiency. As philosopher William Lane Craig describes, "God doesn't just happen to exist, as if by accident. Rather God exists by a necessity of his own nature; it is impossible for him not to exist. Moreover, God does not depend upon any other being for his existence. God alone is self-existent, and everything else depends on Him."²³

> **Aseity:** from the Latin word meaning "from oneself"; God's self-existent and self-sufficient nature.

God is life, and the source of all life. God is a necessary being. Everything that exists does so only because he exists first. We humans *have* life. But God *is* life.

God's aseity also means he is completely free. As theologian John Feinberg puts it, "Absolute self-determination means that God's choices depend on his own desires and purposes alone and that he has the power to actualize those choices."²⁴

We see evidence for these points throughout Scripture. Jesus said in John 5:26, "As the Father has life in himself, so he has granted the Son also to have life in himself." It's a clear statement of self-determination. The apostle Paul further affirms God's self-existence in his speech to a religious society in Athens: "The God who made the world and everything in it, being Lord of heaven and earth, does not live in temples made by man, nor is he served by human hands, as though he needed anything, since he himself gives to all mankind life and breath and everything" (Acts 17:24–25).

As a self-existent being, God alone has the power to cause everything else to exist and to sustain its existence. In his letter to the church at Colossae, Paul reiterates this point: "By him all things were created, in heaven and on earth, visible and invisible, whether thrones or dominions or rulers or authorities—all things were created through him and for him. And he is before all things, and in him all things hold together" (Col. 1:16–17).

<!-- page-91 -->
God's existence, as a completely necessary, free, and self-sufficient being, makes sense of the origin of the universe because, in order to create, a creator must be outside of creation. It all, must have a designer. Further, God's self-existent nature grounds objective moral values, duties, human dignity, and purpose. Objective truths actually exist, and all people and cultures are bound to them at all times. God's self-existence also grounds the idea of consciousness. He is why there is something rather than nothing and why we *know* there is something rather than nothing.

> He is why there is something rather than nothing and why we *know* there is something rather than nothing.

In short, God is the ultimate provider of all things. He doesn't need us; we need him! Unless God invites or permits it, nothing can influence his sovereign choices. We cannot manipulate him.

**2. God is spirit.** God is pure spirit. He has no material nature and is not bound by space or time. He is ultimate reality. As an immaterial spirit, God is not composed of pieces or separable parts.²⁵

The Bible affirms this. Jesus said in John 4:24, "God is spirit, and those who worship him must worship in spirit and truth." God is not "seeable" by us, according to the gospel of John: "No one has ever seen God; the only God, who is at the Father's side, he has made him known" (1:18). Because God is spirit, we are instructed not to make images of him (Exod. 20:4),²⁶ or we wind up worshipping our own impressions rather than God himself.

Some worldviews contend that only the physical universe exists (materialism). The Bible's teaching on God as spirit, though, describes ultimate reality as not merely physical. Reality is physical but also spiritual. To not worship God as spirit is to not worship him truly.

**3. God is personal.** God is a person, not a cosmic force. As theologian Millard J. Erickson phrases it, "God is personal. He is an individual being, with self-consciousness and will, capable of feeling, choosing, and having a reciprocal relationship with other personal and social beings."²⁷

We do not really need to cite specific Scripture passages about the personhood of God because the entirety of the Bible is the story of God interacting personally. In Genesis chapter 1, God talked to the people he had created, instructing them on how to steward creation. In Genesis chapter 2, God told Adam how to steward the garden he had prepared. In Genesis 3, God spoke to the man and the woman about their sin. And so it goes. A simple word search for "the Lord said" in the English Standard Version of the Bible yields 247 results. Scripture reveals God as so personal to the point that people who think God is disengaged can maintain such a belief only by drawing from a source of revelation other than the Bible. Not only is God engaged but his engagement is good. He doesn't just show up for spankings. As Millard Erickson says,

> Because God is a person, the relationship we have with him has a dimension of warmth and understanding. God is not a machine or a computer that automatically supplies the needs of people. He is not merely one of whom we hear, but one whom we meet and know. Accordingly, God is to be treated as a being, not an object or force. He is not something to be used or manipulated.²⁸

<!-- page-92 -->
Although humans cannot see the full scope of history and how our own lives fit into it, God has no such limitation. He sees everything in context, enabling him to do all he wants to do without mistake. Hebrews 4:13 says, "No creature is hidden from his sight, but all are naked and exposed to the eyes of him to whom we must give account." God is never caught off guard, surprised, or outflanked by evil. Says professor Erik Thoennes, "All God's thoughts and actions are perfectly informed by perfect knowledge, so he is perfectly trustworthy."²⁹

## 5. What Are God's Attributes?

Now that we've established what it means for God to be self-existent, spirit, and personal, let's look at several specific characteristics of God revealed in Scripture. These are sometimes called **attributes of God**. Theologian Gordon Lewis defines God's attributes as "qualities or characteristics of his nature."³⁰

The attributes of God are typically classified in two groups. His **incommunicable attributes** are things true only of God, not of humans.³¹ His **communicable attributes** are also true of God but ones in which humans can participate (imperfectly, of course). Let's look at several of each.

**4. God is all-powerful.** We use the word **omnipotent** to say that God is perfect in power. Being untamed and completely free, God possesses the power to do anything he desires. This does not mean, however, that God can do *anything*. God cannot do the logically impossible (such as make a squared circle or a married bachelor), nor can he act contrary to his nature (such as lie or act unjustly). These impossibilities are hardly limitations, however. As Millard Erickson explains,

> **Omnipotent:** God's unique ability to do anything that can be done.

> He can do only those things which are proper objects of his power. Thus, he cannot do the logically absurd or contradictory. He cannot make square circles or triangles with four corners. He cannot undo what happened in the past, although he may wipe out its effects or even the memory of it. He cannot act contrary to his nature—he cannot be cruel or unconcerned. He cannot fail to do what he has promised.³⁵

> God can make the biggest possible rock, and God can lift the biggest possible rock.

Every once in a while you might hear the age-old village atheist question "If God is so powerful, can he make a rock so big he can't lift it?" It may sound like an irrefutable argument against God's omnipotence but only because it is based on a faulty assumption. You should reply, "God can make the biggest possible rock, and God can lift the biggest possible rock. I don't see the problem." In the end, though, God is not interested in our word games. What must be remembered, Thoennes says, is this: "God is able to do all his holy will."³⁶

The Bible is full of passages about God's powerfulness. Jeremiah 32:17 says, "Ah, Lord GOD! It is you who has made the heavens and the earth by your great power and by your outstretched arm! Nothing is too hard for you." In Mark 10:27, Jesus said, "With man it is impossible, but not with God. For all things are possible with God." Isaiah 46:9–10, which we quoted earlier, ends with God saying, "My counsel shall stand, and I will accomplish all my purpose."

<!-- page-94 -->
One problem with God's omnipotence is called the problem of evil: If God is powerful enough to stop evil but does not, isn't he then evil? Or, if God is willing to stop evil but not powerful enough to stop evil, how can we say he is all-powerful? We will devote an entire chapter to responding to this question later in this volume, but perhaps for now we might make a simple observation: every worldview must grapple with the problem of evil. The biblical answer is that we know in our hearts that evil is wrong because we have a sense of what is right; we know further that God is not captive to evil. As Thoennes states, "God's ultimate will

<!-- page-95 -->
is never frustrated by evil, so there is peace and confidence in the face of suffering for those who trust God."³⁷

**5. God is everywhere present.** We use the word **omnipresent** to say that God is eternally present—in all places, at all times. There is nowhere that God is not. This is not to say God is identical to space; he transcends space. Nor does it mean God has no substance. God is everywhere present in the sense that wherever space and matter exist, he is at that place. He knows what is happening there (omniscience) and is causally active there (omnipotence).³⁸

> **Omnipresent:** God's unique ability to be present in all places and at all times.

Once again, we can turn to Scripture to affirm the omnipresence of God. Jeremiah 23:23–24 says, "Am I a God at hand, declares the LORD, and not a God far away? Can a man hide himself in secret places so that I cannot see him? declares the LORD. Do I not fill heaven and earth? declares the LORD." Psalm 139:7–10 says,

> Where shall I go from your Spirit?
> Or where shall I flee from your presence?
> If I ascend to heaven, you are there!
> If I make my bed in Sheol, you are there!
>
> If I take the wings of the morning
> and dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea,
> even there your hand shall lead me,
> and your right hand shall hold me.

As Solomon dedicated the temple he had built, he prayed, "Will God indeed dwell on the earth? Behold, heaven and the highest heaven cannot contain you; how much less this house that I have built!" (1 Kings 8:27).

Knowledge of God's *everywhere-ness* comforts us greatly. A child of God is never out of reach of his providential care. The wicked are never safe because God knows of their wicked acts.

> **Immanent:** an attribute of God that describes him as being both within and among his creation.

> **Transcendent:** an attribute of God that describes him as being both above and outside of his creation.

Some people get confused about this. How can God be simultaneously *with* us and *removed from* us? As Rick Cornish states, "God is independent from the universe and removed from us, called transcendence; yet He is active in the universe and accessible to us, called immanence."³⁹ Scripture affirms God as both **immanent** and **transcendent**. Isaiah 57:15 says, "Thus says the One who is high and lifted up, who inhabits eternity, whose name is Holy: 'I dwell in the high and holy place, and also with him who is of a contrite and lowly spirit, to revive the spirit of the lowly, and to revive the heart of the contrite.'"
<!-- page-96 -->
To say God is immanent and not transcendent is **pantheism** (i.e., the universe is God). To say God is transcendent and not immanent is **deism** (i.e., God set the universe in motion and is known by nature and reason but is not known personally). Recognizing God as both transcendent and immanent, based on Scripture, helps us understand God as great enough to create all things but humble enough to enter into his own creation.

> **Pantheism:** the belief that everything in the universe is ultimately divine.

> **Deism:** the belief that God exists and created the world but currently stands completely aloof from his creation; the belief that reason and nature sufficiently reveal the existence of God but that God has not revealed himself through any type of special revelation.

Of course, some Christians are "functional deists"; they believe that God enters creation but act as though he does not. Charles H. Kraft puts it this way:

> Deists believe that God created the universe and set up unchangeable, universal laws that preclude him from getting directly involved in the running of the universe in any way.… Though we Evangelicals would contend that deism embodies an unacceptable, even heretical understanding of God's relation to the universe, I'm afraid we may have been infected.⁴⁰

If God is everywhere present, as he's revealed in the Bible, he can be both Creator and Redeemer. In his nature as the infinite Creator, he exists within creation and is present with us in the person of Jesus (Acts 17:24–27).⁴¹ He is the Alpha and the Omega—the beginning and the end (Rev. 22:13).⁴² He is the very definition of reason, yet we are invited to reason with him (Isa. 1:18).⁴³ He is high and lifted up (Isa. 6:1),⁴⁴ yet he answers when we call out in distress (Jon. 2:1–2).⁴⁵

**6. God is unchanging.** God's character is constant and unchangeable. He is the same yesterday, today, and forever. He cannot lie. Everything he says he will do, he does. Scripture says in Numbers 23:19, "God is not man, that he should lie, or a son of man, that he should change his mind. Has he said, and will he not do it? Or has he spoken, and will he not fulfill it?" Psalm 33:11 concurs: "The counsel of the LORD stands forever, the plans of his heart to all generations." God does not change, which is a source of protection for his people. Malachi 3:6 says, "I the LORD do not change; therefore you, O children of Jacob, are not consumed."

God confirms his unchanging character by binding himself to his promises. Hebrews 6:17 says, "When God desired to show more convincingly to the heirs of the promise the unchangeable character of his purpose, he guaranteed it with an oath." God's unchanging perfection is solid ground for assurance of salvation: God does not change his standards. What he expects of us remains the same. As author Bruce Milne says, "God's changelessness is expressed in his faithfulness and dependability in his relationships with his people."⁴⁶

<!-- page-97 -->
While we're on the subject of God's unchanging character, we need to point out the fact that there are passages in Scripture that seem to contradict the claim that God is unchanging. For example, Genesis 6:6⁴⁷ says that in view of the wickedness of people, God "regretted" having made humans. In Exodus 32:14,⁴⁸ the Lord "relented" from his plan to destroy the children of Israel after an appeal by Moses. There are many more examples, and they all seem to be quite clear that God considered what he had done and changed his planned course. How can we say that God is "unchanging" in view of these passages?

The Bible includes a narrative of a prophet named Jonah that may help us make sense of this apparent contradiction. God sent Jonah to a city called Nineveh to preach to the people so they would repent of their sins and avoid destruction. Jonah tried to run away from God's plan and ended up in the belly of a big fish, where he regretted his rebellion and decided to go to Nineveh after all. This much of the narrative is familiar to most people. When Jonah finally did make it to Nineveh, the people listened to his message and repented. Jonah 3:10 says, "When God saw what they did, how they turned from their evil way, God relented of the disaster that he had said he would do to them, and he did not do it."

Ironically, Jonah became quite angry about God's act of mercy. He assumed God was unchanging in the sense that he would never reverse anything he had set in motion. Jonah seemed to anticipate Nineveh's destruction with some delight, perhaps because it would allow him to say, "I told you so." But then God reversed his planned destruction, and Jonah felt like a fool.

So what did Jonah fail to understand about God? As we have seen, God is all-knowing. Therefore, he knows how things occurred in the past, how they occur now, and how they will occur in the future. He is also all-powerful, which means he is able to change how things will turn out. Jonah felt bitter because he failed to accept that God would not change according to Jonah's whims. He told God, in a whiny spirit, "I knew that you are a gracious God and merciful, slow to anger and abounding in steadfast love, and relenting from disaster" (4:2).

From Jonah's perspective, God had apparently changed his mind. But as theologian John Frame has pointed out, this so-called change is actually an indication of the deeper unchanging nature of God's character: his love. He always has loved and always will love. To act out of love is not a change of his character but an affirmation of it.

To understand this, we should return to God's transcendence and immanence. As a transcendent being, God is outside of time. But as a God who is immanent, he also acts in time so we can understand. Frame puts it this way:

> Within time, he sees time as we do, the past as past, the future as future. He responds appropriately to each moment, each day, as it comes: with rejoicing or grief. When his rejoicing turns to grief, or vice versa, we can say as the biblical writers do that he changes. But these changes are not changes to his eternal plan. Rather they represent his changing relationships to creatures, as he executes his eternal plan through history.⁴⁹

So God does not change his mind or his character, and because of this consistency, he changes his actions as a character-driven act of mercy, love, justice, or any of the other aspects of his character.

All right. So we've taken a brief glimpse at six incommunicable attributes of God, attributes that are true of God alone. There are also four *communicable* attributes, exemplified by God perfectly and infinitely and yet also available for humans to exhibit, however imperfectly. Let's take a look at these.

<!-- page-98 -->
**7. God is wise.** To say God is wise is to say he knows all the implications of his actual and potential actions, bringing about no unintended consequences. The wisdom of God means, according to Millard Erickson,

> when God acts, he takes all of the facts and correct values into consideration. Knowing all things, God has access to all information.… God never has to revise his estimation of something because of additional information. He sees all things in their proper perspective; thus he does not give anything a higher or lower value than what it ought to have. One can therefore pray confidently, knowing that God will not grant something that is not good.⁵⁰

Our perspective is always limited. Like a child who thinks he *needs* a new toy or more candy, we often think we know what we need to make life work. But God knows better. He knows when we don't *want* what we *think* we want, or don't *need* what we *think* we need. He is wisdom itself. We can be wise but are often foolish. God is never foolish.

> [God] knows when we don't *want* what we *think* we want, or don't *need* what we *think* we need.

Scripture affirms that God is wisdom more than two hundred times. "Oh, the depth of the riches and wisdom and knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his judgments and how inscrutable his ways!" says Romans 11:33. Psalm 104:24 says, "O LORD, how manifold are your works! In wisdom have you made them all; the earth is of your creatures."

As Gordon Lewis puts it, "History is the product of God's eternally wise planning, creative purpose, providential perseverance, and common grace. God fills space and time with his presence, sustains it, and gives it purpose and value."⁵¹ People are seen to be wise when God's wisdom is in them and to be fools when knowledge of him is absent. We ought to pursue wisdom all our lives, and its ultimate source is God.

**8. God is righteous.** God's righteousness, according to Millard Erickson, means that "his actions are in accord with the law which he himself has established."⁵² God is always right, and his decisions are always just. God's justice, to Erickson, is God's "official righteousness, his requirement that other moral agents adhere to the standards as well. God is, in other words, like a judge who as a private individual adheres to the law of society, and in his official capacity administers that same law, applying it to others."⁵³

Deuteronomy 32:4 says, "The Rock, his work is perfect, for all his ways are justice. A God of faithfulness and without iniquity, just and upright is he." Psalm 89:14 affirms, "Righteousness and justice are the foundation of your throne; steadfast love and faithfulness go before you." Many people think God's judgment is a cause for terror, but Psalm 98:8–9 says that joy should be our response instead: "Let the hills sing for joy together before the LORD, for he comes to judge the earth. He will judge the world with righteousness, and the peoples with equity."

God's righteousness and justice express his holiness and moral purity. This is good news in a corrupt world where authorities too often act unjustly. God will always do right. He can't be bribed and he won't lie. He is in the business of righting wrongs.

<!-- page-99 -->
**9. God is loving.** God is Trinity, or more accurately, Tri-unity. Three in one. We'll talk more about God as Trinity soon, but a key attribute of God that flows out of this peculiar but profound teaching is *love*. We see God's relationship within his own being as Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, and this relationship is expressed through love. Gordon Lewis defines love in this respect as "a settled purpose of will involving the whole person in seeking the well-being of others."⁵⁴ God, whose perfect expression of self-giving love is not selfish, doesn't just put up with us; he really *loves* us. His love seeks our highest good, drives out fear, and does not change based on how good we are.

Erik Thoennes says, "God freely and eternally gives of himself. The ultimate historical demonstration of God's love is seen in the cross of Christ."⁵⁵ Ephesians 2:4–5 says, "God, being rich in mercy, because of the great love with which he loved us, even when we were dead in our trespasses, made us alive together with Christ—by grace you have been saved." Before suffering on the cross, Jesus prayed for his disciples to experience oneness "so that the world may know that you sent me and loved them even as you loved me" (John 17:23).

> The Bible describes love as so central to God's character that to misunderstand it is to *not even know God*.

Some people grow weary of "Jesus loves me" and "Oh, how he loves me" kinds of songs. Perhaps they see talk of love as a touchy-feely, insubstantial part of Christian theology. But the Bible describes love as so central to God's character that to misunderstand it is to *not even know God*. The apostle John says this quite clearly:

> Anyone who does not love does not know God, because God is love. In this the love of God was made manifest among us, that God sent his only Son into the world, so that we might live through him. In this is love, not that we have loved God but that he loved us and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins. (1 John 4:8–10)

The centrality of God's love is not just a New Testament understanding of God. Deuteronomy 33:12 says, "The beloved of the LORD dwells in safety. The High God surrounds him all day long, and dwells between his shoulders." Even Jeremiah the prophet, who had many strong things to say about God's judgment, affirmed, "The LORD appeared to him from far away. I have loved you with an everlasting love; therefore I have continued my faithfulness to you" (Jer. 31:3).

Keep this firmly in mind: God does not love us because we are lovable. If we were cuddly and innocent, we might be excused for thinking this way, but we're not. We know in our hearts we are self-serving, double-dealing, mass-manipulating, pity-party-throwing whiners. There's little in us for an infinitely wise, all-knowing, and all-powerful God to love. He loves us anyway *because of who he is*.

> **Agape:** from the Greek word *agapē* for "selfless love."

It is God's nature to love. And here's some stunning news: because of the power of the Holy Spirit, we can love this way too. In *Harper's Bible Dictionary*, we read,

<!-- page-100 -->
> Agape (ah-gah'pay), the principal Greek word used for 'love' in the NT. Of the three words for love in the Hellenistic world, it was the least common. The other two words were *eros*, which meant sexual love, and *philos*, which meant friendship, although their meanings could vary according to the context in which they appeared.

> **Eros:** the Greek word for "sexual love."

> **Philos:** the Greek word for "brotherly, familial love."

Agape, because it was used so seldom and was so unspecific in meaning, could be used in the NT to designate the unmerited love God shows to humankind in sending his son as suffering redeemer. When used of human love, it means selfless and self-giving love.⁵⁶

Romans 5:5 says that God's love (agape) has been "poured into our hearts through the Holy Spirit who has been given to us." It is this kind of love of which the Paul speaks in his famous passage on love:

> Love [agape] is patient and kind; love [agape] does not envy or boast; it is not arrogant or rude. It does not insist on its own way; it is not irritable or resentful; it does not rejoice at wrongdoing, but rejoices with the truth. Love [agape] bears all things, believes all things, hopes all things, endures all things. (1 Cor. 13:4–7)

Whether in friendship, in family relationship, or in a romantic sense, we should pray for the Holy Spirit to pour love into our hearts, enabling us to love truly, as God loves, rather than just through fuzzy sentimentality.

> **Mercy:** not receiving what one deserves.

> **Grace:** receiving what one does not deserve.

**10. God is merciful and gracious.** Mercy and grace are two sides of a coin. In his mercy, God *doesn't* give us what we *do* deserve. In his grace, God *does* give us what we *don't* deserve. Millard Erickson says, "God's mercy is his tenderhearted, loving compassion for his people. It is his tenderness of heart toward the needy. If grace contemplates humans as sinful, guilty, and condemned, mercy sees them as miserable and needy."⁵⁷

Just as God loves because it is his character to do so, God also dispenses grace not based on our worthiness but because grace is *who he is*. Erickson says,

> Grace is another attribute which is part of the manifold of God's love. By this we mean that God deals with his people not on the basis of their merit or worthiness, what they deserve, but simply according to their need; in other words, he deals with them on the basis of his goodness and generosity.⁵⁸

Grace and mercy are enduring characteristics of God. Some look at the differences between the Old and the New Testaments to conclude that God must have changed at some point, from being judgmental to being gracious. Scripture itself refutes this, however. The Old Testament passage Psalm 103:8 says, "The LORD is merciful and gracious, slow to anger and abounding in steadfast love." Nehemiah, the leader who rescued Jerusalem, said in his leading of corporate praise at God's provision,

<!-- page-101 -->
> They refused to obey and were not mindful of the wonders that you performed among them, but they stiffened their neck and appointed a leader to return to their slavery in Egypt. But you are a God ready to forgive, gracious and merciful, slow to anger and abounding in steadfast love, and did not forsake them. (Neh. 9:17)

As Nehemiah recognized, God's character, not people's goodness, was the basis of his grace and mercy. Titus 3:5 says, "He saved us, not because of works done by us in righteousness, but according to his own mercy, by the washing of regeneration and renewal of the Holy Spirit." In case we somehow missed the point, Ephesians 2:8–9 emphasizes, "By grace you have been saved through faith. And this is not your own doing; it is the gift of God, not a result of works, so that no one may boast."

The common thread of God's grace and mercy runs through all of human history. God's justice demands atonement for sin and his mercy provides a savior to take the penalty, making way for our salvation. Consider all of God's attributes together and you get a picture of him as consistent, trustworthy, good, generous, and loving though we deserve none of it. For most Christians, everything we've talked about so far makes sense. But one doctrine presented in Scripture has confused people for centuries and still confuses people today: *God as Trinity*. For some, it is a barrier to accepting God's mercy and grace. A close examination, though, reveals how the Trinity affirms and makes sense of every other aspect of God's nature and character.

## 6. God Is Trinity

> **Doctrine of the Trinity:** the orthodox Christian belief that God is one being in three persons: Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.

The **doctrine of the Trinity** teaches that God in his being is Trinity or, as some put it, Tri-unity. He is three in one: Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. In the Trinity, as seminary professor Scott Horrell phrases it, "One divine Being eternally exists as three distinct centers of consciousness, wholly equal in nature, genuinely personal in relationships, and each mutually indwelling the other."⁵⁹

Say what?

> **Essence:** defining attributes that give an entity its fundamental identity.

The doctrine of the Trinity is perhaps the most confusing aspect of God's nature. How can three persons have one **essence**? It seems unreasonable. And the word *Trinity* isn't even in the Bible. Can we say that the Bible even teaches it?

On the other hand, if the Trinity is biblical, failing to uphold it will leave us with an inaccurate view of God. This does not mean that we'll be able to make perfect sense of it or that God is simple to understand.

Let's dig in and see if we can grasp at least the essential nature of what it means to say that God is Trinity. Erik Thoennes states it this way:

> The biblical teaching on the Trinity is summarized with four essential affirmations: (1) There is one—and only one—true and living God, (2) This one God eternally exists in

<!-- page-102 -->
three persons—God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Spirit, (3) These three persons are completely equal in attributes, each having the same divine nature, and (4) While each person is fully and completely God, the persons are not identical.⁶⁰

> **Tritheism:** the belief that the Trinity is composed of three separate and distinct Gods.

> **Heresy:** any belief that is contrary to orthodox Christian doctrine.

> **Modalism (aka Sabellianism):** the belief that the Trinity is composed of one God who has presented himself in different modes, or forms (the Father in the Old Testament, the Son in the New Testament, and the Holy Spirit today) throughout time.

The Trinity is *not* claiming there is one God *and* three Gods; the Trinity teaches that there is one God who exists as three distinct *persons* (one *What* and three *Whos*). It's hard to illustrate this by way of analogy. Some people say the Trinity is like an egg with a shell, a white, and a yolk, all together. But this is incorrect. Each part of an egg is a separate and distinct part. To say the Trinity is like an egg is to flirt with **tritheism**: three Gods. Others say the Trinity is like the three states of water: liquid, solid, and gas. But water is still water. Saying the Trinity is like water gets close to a **heresy** called **modalism**, which denies the "three-ness" of the Trinity.

Here's what we can know from examining Scripture:

**God is one essence.** Deuteronomy 6:4 says, "Hear, O Israel: The LORD our God, the LORD is one." Isaiah 45:5 says, "I am the LORD, and there is no other, besides me there is no God; I equip you, though you do not know me." Ephesians 4:4–6 says, "There is one body and one Spirit—just as you were called to the one hope that belongs to your call—one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and Father of all, who is over all and through all and in all."

**The Father is God.** First Corinthians 8:6 says that "for us there is one God, the Father, from whom are all things and for whom we exist." John 6:27 says, "Do not work for the food that perishes, but for the food that endures to eternal life, which the Son of Man will give to you. For on him God the Father has set his seal." Second Peter 1:17 says, "He received honor and glory from God the Father."

**Jesus is God.** Titus 2:13 talks about "waiting for our blessed hope, the appearing of the glory of our great God and Savior Jesus Christ." Hebrews 1:3 says, "He is the radiance of the glory of God and the exact imprint of his nature, and he upholds the universe by the word of his power." John 1:1 says, in introducing Jesus, "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God." Jesus manifests many of the incommunicable attributes of God such as eternality (John 17:5),⁶¹ omniscience (Matt. 9:4),⁶² and omnipotence and omnipresence (28:18–20).⁶³ He is God over all (Rom. 9:5).⁶⁴

<!-- page-103 -->
**The Holy Spirit is God.** The book of Acts recounts a conversation between the apostle Peter and Ananias, the man who lied about his offering to the Lord. Peter says, "Ananias, why has Satan filled your heart to lie to the Holy Spirit?… You have not lied to man but to God" (Acts 5:3–4). First Corinthians 3:16 says, "Do you not know that you are God's temple and that God's Spirit dwells in you?" First Corinthians 6:11 says, "You were washed, you were sanctified, you were justified in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ and by the Spirit of our God." Scripture also shows the Holy Spirit manifesting several attributes of God: omnipresence (Ps. 139:7),⁶⁵ omniscience (1 Cor. 2:10–11),⁶⁶ and omnipotence (Job 33:4).⁶⁷

The word *Trinity* is used by theologians to describe this "three and yet one" nature of God. The word itself is not used in Scripture. It was first used by a third-century theologian named Tertullian. Still, there are many passages in which all three persons of the Trinity are present:

> The grace of the Lord *Jesus Christ* and the love of *God* and the fellowship of the *Holy Spirit* be with you all. (2 Cor. 13:14)

> Go therefore and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the *Father* and of the *Son* and of the *Holy Spirit*, teaching them to observe all that I have commanded you. And behold, I am with you always, to the end of the age. (Matt. 28:19–20)

> Peter, an apostle of Jesus Christ … according to the foreknowledge of *God the Father*, in the sanctification of the *Spirit*, for obedience to *Jesus Christ* and for sprinkling with his blood: May grace and peace be multiplied to you. (1 Pet. 1:1–2)

> How much more will the blood of *Christ*, who through the eternal *Spirit* offered himself without blemish to *God*, purify our conscience from dead works to serve the living God. (Heb. 9:14)

One of the clearest accounts of all three persons in the Trinity being present together is the baptism of Jesus. Matthew 3:16–17 describes the event this way: "When Jesus was baptized, immediately he went up from the water, and behold, the heavens were opened to him, and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove and coming to rest on him; and behold, a voice from heaven said, 'This is my beloved Son, with whom I am well pleased.'" In this passage, God the Son is in the water as God the Father speaks and God the Spirit descends; in this one scene we see the distinct persons of the Trinity, as well as their unity of purpose. The Father blesses the work of the Son even as the Son obeys the Father and while the Spirit endorses both the will of the Father and the obedience of the Son. It is an amazing display of unifying love.

Far from being an esoteric doctrine that only pointy-headed theologians care about, the doctrine of God as Trinity affects everything. God is both eternally personal and in relationship. Thus, because of the relationship of the godhead, we understand what it means to be persons in relationship. As pastor Tim Keller puts it, "God did not create us to get the cosmic, infinite joy of mutual love and glorification, but to *share* it."⁶⁸

<!-- page-104 -->
Further, the Trinity enables us to know God through Christ. Atonement becomes possible: the blood of Christ was offered through the Spirit so we can serve God. *Love* becomes possible: the relationship among the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit shows us what our relationships in the body of Christ should be like (Eph. 4:4–7).⁶⁹ *Unity* becomes possible: we understand what harmony in relationships looks like because of the Trinity. No wonder Erik Thoennes says that "biblical Christianity stands or falls with the doctrine of the Trinity."⁷⁰

The doctrine of the Trinity clearly distinguishes Christian theism from other theistic views, such as Islam. As Muslims see it, the idea that God eternally exists as three persons in one essence is polytheism, the belief in more than one God, and it's blasphemy.

So how do Muslims understand the Trinity? First, they see Jesus as a prophet but not as God.⁷¹ Second, Muslims take Jesus's prophecy of the coming of "another counselor" to be a prophecy about the coming of Muhammad, not the coming of the Holy Spirit. Muslim theologian A. Yusuf Ali makes the case in a footnote to surah 3:81 in the Quran, using the word *Comforter* from an older Bible translation:

> You (People of the Book) are bound by your own oaths, sworn solemnly in the presence of your own Prophets. In the Old Testament as it now exists, Muhammad is foretold in Deut. xviii. 18; and the rise of the Arab nation in Isaiah, xlii. 11, for Kedar was a son of Ismail and the name is used for the Arab nation: in the New Testament as it now exists, Muhammad is foretold in the Gospel of St. John, xiv. 16, xv. 26, and xvi.7: the future Comforter cannot be the Holy Spirit as understood by Christians, because the Holy Spirit already was present helping and guiding Jesus. The Greek word translated "Comforter" is "Paracletos", which is an easy corruption from "Periclytos", which is almost a literal translation of "Muhammad" or "Ahmad."⁷²

But absolutely no evidence supports the claim of *parakletos* being a corruption of *periclytos*. Of the more than five thousand manuscripts now available, not one witnesses to *periclytos*.⁷³ Ali's charge of textual corruption in this example is without historical or textual support.

Additionally, just a few verses after John 14:16, Jesus clearly identifies the counselor to whom he refers as the Holy Spirit: "The Counselor, *the Holy Spirit*, whom the Father will send in my name, will teach you all things and will remind you of everything I have said to you" (John 14:26 NIV). Muslims claim that later Christians made up this statement, but such an accusation requires at least *some* evidence. There is none.

## 7. Conclusion

Our lengthy discussion of God's nature and character in this chapter can be summarized in this statement from Gordon Lewis:

> God is an invisible, personal, and living Spirit, distinguished from all other spirits by several kinds of attributes: metaphysically, God is self-existent, eternal, and unchanging; intellectually, God is omniscient, faithful, and wise; ethically, God is just, merciful, and loving; emotionally, God detests evil, is longsuffering, and is compassionate; existentially, God is free, authentic, and omnipotent; relationally, God is transcendent in being, immanent universally in providential activity, and immanent with his people in redemptive activity.⁷⁴

<!-- page-105 -->
These attributes of God are unified in his nature. God doesn't *become* these things by doing them, nor does any aspect of his character take second place to any other aspect. As humans, we have a hard time seeing how we can be both just and merciful at the same time. God does not evidence this conflict. The Bible reveals him to be both perfectly just and perfectly merciful. We see this in the person of Christ. Judaism denies Jesus Christ as the Messiah and the incarnation of God: God may care about us, but he has not yet entered into our suffering to redeem us. The same is true of Muslim theology. As Timothy George observes, "In the Quran, God's love is conditional and accidental. Love is something God *does*, not that which God *is*.… In the Christian faith, God's love is neither conditional nor accidental."⁷⁵ Contrast surah 19:96 of the Quran: "As to those who believe and work righteousness, Allah will pay them (in full) their reward; but Allah loveth not those who do wrong"⁷⁶ with Romans 5:8 "God demonstrates his own love for us in this: While we were still sinners, Christ died for us" (NIV).

> The only proper response to the scriptural understanding of God is worship.

The only proper response to the scriptural understanding of God is worship. We bow down in humble awe and reverence to the perfect, utterly trustworthy, only wise, self-existent, personal, completely unselfish, great, good God: Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. Amen.

## Endnotes

1. John Micklethwait and Adrian Wooldridge, *God Is Back: How the Global Revival of Faith Is Changing the World* (New York: Penguin, 2009), 12.
2. Micklethwait and Wooldridge, *God Is Back*, 18.
3. Frank Newport, "More than 9 in 10 Americans Continue to Believe in God," Gallup, June 3, 2011, www.gallup.com/poll/147887/americans-continue-believe-god.aspx.
4. Paul Froese and Christopher Bader, *America's Four Gods: What We Say about God—and What That Says about Us* (New York: Oxford, 2010), 27–29.
5. Froese and Bader, *America's Four Gods*, 31.
6. Froese and Bader, *America's Four Gods*, 32.
7. Froese and Bader, *America's Four Gods*, 33–34. It should be noted that *authoritative* and *judgmental* are loaded terms in today's world. God certainly does have authority in his universe, but his love and authority work in concert, not in opposition. The Bible proclaims God to be a completely balanced being, exercising grace, mercy, and loving kindness alongside authority and judgment, without contradiction. God does judge humans but does so as a just and all-knowing deity who has a right to judge and does so with understanding and mercy.
8. Froese and Bader, *America's Four Gods*, 60.
9. Froese and Bader, *America's Four Gods*, 66.
10. Froese and Bader, *America's Four Gods*, 90–91, 104.
11. Quoted in Froese and Bader, *America's Four Gods*, 10.
12. Matthew 22:37: "He said to him, 'You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your mind.'"
13. See David K. Clark, *To Know and Love God: Method for Theology*, Foundations of Evangelical Theology Series, ed. John S. Feinberg (Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2003).
14. Richard John Neuhaus, "Telling the World Its Own Story," The Wilberforce Forum, July 2001, www.colsoncenter.org/search-library/search?view=searchdetail&id=21199.
15. A. W. Tozer, *The Knowledge of the Holy: The Attributes of God and Their Meaning in the Christian Life* (New York: HarperSanFrancisco, 1992), 1.
16. Froese and Bader, *America's Four Gods*, 5.
17. Os Guinness, *God in the Dark: The Assurance of Faith beyond a Shadow of Doubt* (Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 1996), 58–59.
18. Francis A. Schaeffer, *He Is There and He Is Not Silent* (Carol Stream, IL: Tyndale, 1972), chap. 1.
19. Quoted in Thomas V. Morris, *Our Idea of God: An Introduction to Philosophical Theology* (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity, 1991), 35.
20. Anselm, quoted in Morris, *Our Idea of God*, 35.
21. Jonathan Morrow, "Can We Truly Know an Infinite God?," *Think Christianly* (blog), December 29, 2012, www.thinkchristianly.org/can-we-truly-know-an-infinite-god/.
22. Augustine, *Lectures on the Gospel of John*, tract XXXIV. A Select Library of Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers of the Christian Church (1), VII, 217–21. As quoted in Herman Bavinck, *Reformed Dogmatics: Abridged in One Volume*, ed. John Bolt (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker, 2011), 154.
23. William Lane Craig, *God Is Self-Sufficient*, Dr. Craig's What Is God Like?, no. 4 (La Mirada, CA: Biola University, 2012).
24. John S. Feinberg, *No One Like Him: The Doctrine of God*, Foundations of Evangelical Theology Series, ed. John S. Feinberg (Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2001), 240.
25. There is a significant controversy among evangelical theologians today over the doctrine of the simplicity of God. It's a complicated issue, but by the simplicity of God, theologians usually mean that all of God's attributes/properties are numerically identical with each other and his existence. The philosophical problems for metaphysical simplicity are significant (that God's omniscience is not different from his love or that God cannot do or know any different than he knows or does). Leading Christian philosophers such as Alvin Plantinga and William Lane Craig have critiqued this view along with evangelical theologian John Feinberg: "These philosophical problems plus the biblical considerations raised earlier led me to conclude that simplicity is not one of the divine attributes. This doesn't mean that God has physical parts, but that the implications of the doctrine of metaphysical simplicity are too problematic to maintain the doctrine." *No One Like Him*, 325–37. See also Jay Wesley Richards, *The Untamed God: A Philosophical Exploration of Divine Perfection, Immutability, and Simplicity* (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity, 2003). On the other side, see Norman Geisler and H. Wayne House, *The Battle for God: Responding to the Challenge of Neotheism* (Grand Rapids, MI: Kregel, 2001). A "third way" might be to talk of the unity of God instead, focusing on the way in which none of God's attributes is in conflict with another.
26. Exodus 20:4: "You shall not make for yourself a carved image, or any likeness of anything that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the earth."
27. Millard J. Erickson, *Introducing Christian Doctrine*, 2nd ed. (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2001), 83.
28. Erickson, *Introducing Christian Doctrine*, 83.
29. Gordon R. Lewis, "Attributes of God," in *Evangelical Dictionary of Theology*, ed. Walter A. Elwell (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2001), 496.
30. Erickson, *Introducing Christian Doctrine*, 89.
31. The Bible unanimously teaches that God is everlasting but is agnostic as to whether God exists in time or timelessly. For a great discussion of this, see William Lane Craig, *Time and Eternity: Exploring God's Relationship to Time* (Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2001). This is a coherence/conceptual question about what the nature of time is and what is necessary for a living God who relates personally to his people entails (for example, prayer, incarnation), not an orthodoxy question.
32. In recent years, some theologians and preachers such as John Sanders, Greg Boyd, and Winkie Pratney have advocated something called Open Theism. Open Theists think it is impossible for God to know future events because such events have not yet occurred. Open Theists maintain that God knows everything logically possible to know but think the future isn't logically possible to know. One motivation for Open Theism is that saying God does not know the future makes the problem of evil less painful: God is doing the best he can in light of not knowing what choices we will make and what will result from those choices. But this diminishes God and makes the problem worse; not only is God now without knowledge, but he is also powerless against bad things happening. (Later in this volume, we'll examine a very different argument about why God allows evil and suffering.) Many passages of Scripture indicate that God knows the future (Isa. 41:21–23; 42:9; 43:9–12; 44:7; 48:3–7). These verses, however, indicate that God can know the future. If we understand the verses correctly, then we must conclude that Open Theism is inconsistent with biblical teaching. Although it is beyond the scope of this chapter, for a biblical defense of God's foreknowledge in light of the challenge of Open Theism, see Bruce A. Ware, *God's Lesser Glory: The Diminished God of Open Theism* (Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2000). For a philosophical treatment of the relevant issues, see William Lane Craig, *The Only Wise God: The Compatibility of Divine Foreknowledge and Human Freedom* (Eugene, OR: Wipf and Stock, 2000). A shorter, simpler treatment may be found in William Lane Craig, *What Does God Know? Reconciling Divine Foreknowledge and Human Freedom* (Norcross, GA: RZIM, 2002).
33. Lewis, "Attributes of God," 494.
34. Erik Thoennes, *Life's Biggest Questions: What the Bible Says about the Things That Matter Most* (Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2011), 66.
35. Erickson, *Introducing Christian Doctrine*, 86.
36. Thoennes, *Life's Biggest Questions*, 65.
37. Thoennes, *Life's Biggest Questions*, 65.
38. J. P. Moreland and William Lane Craig, *Philosophical Foundations for a Christian Worldview* (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity, 2003), 515. See also Craig, *God Is Self-Sufficient*.
39. Rick Cornish, *Five Minute Theologian: Maximum Truth in Minimum Time* (Colorado Springs, CO: NavPress, 2004), 99.
40. Charles H. Kraft, *Christianity with Power: Your Worldview and Your Experience of the Supernatural* (Eugene, OR: Wipf and Stock, 1989), 28.
41. Acts 17:24–27: "The God who made the world and everything in it, being Lord of heaven and earth, does not live in temples made by man, nor is he served by human hands, as though he needed anything, since he himself gives to all mankind life and breath and everything. And he made from one man every nation of mankind to live on all the face of the earth, having determined allotted periods and the boundaries of their dwelling place, that they should seek God, and perhaps feel their way toward him and find him. Yet he is actually not far from each one of us."
42. Revelation 22:13: "I am the Alpha and the Omega, the first and the last, the beginning and the end."
43. Isaiah 1:18: "Come now, let us reason together, says the LORD: though your sins are like scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they are red like crimson, they shall become like wool."
44. Isaiah 6:1: "In the year that King Uzziah died I saw the Lord sitting upon a throne, high and lifted up; and the train of his robe filled the temple."
45. Jonah 2:1–2: "Jonah prayed to the LORD his God from the belly of the fish, saying, 'I called out to the LORD, out of my distress, and he answered me; out of the belly of Sheol I cried, and you heard my voice.'"
46. Bruce Milne, *Know the Truth: A Handbook of Christian Belief*, 3rd ed. (Downers Grove, IL: IVP Academic, 2009), 86.
47. Genesis 6:6: "The LORD regretted that he had made man on the earth, and it grieved him to his heart."
48. Exodus 32:14: "The LORD relented from the disaster that he had spoken of bringing on his people."
49. John Frame, "Does God Change His Mind?," Frame-Poythress.org, May 17, 2012, www.frame-poythress.org/does-god-change-his-mind/.
50. Erickson, *Introducing Christian Doctrine*, 85.
51. Lewis, "Attributes of God," 494.
52. Erickson, *Introducing Christian Doctrine*, 90.
53. Erickson, *Introducing Christian Doctrine*, 90.
54. Lewis, "Attributes of God," 497.
55. Thoennes, *Life's Biggest Questions*, 67.
56. Paul J. Achtemeier, *Harper's Bible Dictionary* (San Francisco: Harper & Row and the Society of Biblical Literature, 1985), 14.
57. Erickson, *Introducing Christian Doctrine*, 93.
58. Erickson, *Introducing Christian Doctrine*, 93.
59. J. Scott Horrell, "The Eternal Son of God in the Social Trinity," in *Jesus in Trinitarian Perspective: An Introductory Christology*, ed. Fred Sanders and Klaus Issler (Nashville: B&H Academic, 2007), 47–48.
60. Thoennes, *Life's Biggest Questions*, 71–72.
61. John 17:5: "Father, glorify me in your own presence with the glory that I had with you before the world existed."
62. Matthew 9:4: "Jesus, knowing their thoughts, said, 'Why do you think evil in your hearts?'"
63. Matthew 28:18–20: "Jesus came and said to them, 'All authority in heaven and on earth has been given to me. Go therefore and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, teaching them to observe all that I have commanded you. And behold, I am with you always, to the end of the age.'"
64. Romans 9:5: "To them belong the patriarchs, and from their race, according to the flesh, is the Christ, who is God over all, blessed forever. Amen."
65. Psalm 139:7: "Where shall I go from your Spirit? Or where shall I flee from your presence?"
66. 1 Corinthians 2:10–11: "These things God has revealed to us through the Spirit. For the Spirit searches everything, even the depths of God. For who knows a person's thoughts except the spirit of that person, which is in him? So also no one comprehends the thoughts of God except the Spirit of God."
67. Job 33:4: "The Spirit of God has made me, and the breath of the Almighty gives me life."
68. Timothy J. Keller, *The Reason for God: Belief in an Age of Skepticism* (New York: Dutton, 2008), 219 (emphasis mine).
69. Ephesians 4:4–7: "There is one body and one Spirit—just as you were called to the one hope that belongs to your call—one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and Father of all, who is over all and through all and in all. But grace was given to each one of us according to the measure of Christ's gift."
70. Thoennes, *Life's Biggest Questions*, 78–79.
71. For more information on the difference between Islam and Christianity on who Jesus is, see Nabeel Qureshi, *Seeking Allah, Finding Jesus* (Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2014). Here is a summary of the issue: The weight of the evidence supports Jesus's claim that "if you believed Moses, you would believe me; for he wrote of me" (John 5:46). This is a reference to Deuteronomy 18:15–18 (that God would "raise up for them a prophet … from among their brothers"). Muslims say this prophecy couldn't have been about Jesus because Jesus did not seek to restore the people of God to the purity of the law. We see this in Jesus's statement in Matthew 5:17–20: "Do not think that I have come to abolish the Law or the Prophets; I have not come to abolish them but to fulfill them. For truly, I say to you, until heaven and earth pass away, not an iota, not a dot, will pass from the Law until all is accomplished. Therefore whoever relaxes one of the least of these commandments and teaches others to do the same will be called least in the kingdom of heaven, but whoever does them and teaches them will be called great in the kingdom of heaven. For I tell you, unless your

<!-- page-108 -->
righteousness exceeds that of the scribes and Pharisees, you will never enter the kingdom of heaven." Later New Testament authors even speak of "the law of Christ" (Gal. 6:2; 1 Cor. 9:21). Muslims also say the phrase "from among their brothers" must refer to a non-Israelite. The reference to "brothers" is repeatedly used in Deuteronomy 17 and 18, though, and the context is always to a fellow Israelite (see, for example, Deuteronomy 17:15, which uses the same phrase to refer to the installment of a king over Israel, saying that he must be "from among your brothers," not "a foreigner"). Muhammad definitely was a foreigner to Israel. Jesus was an Israelite, and the whole testimony of the New Testament is that the Old Testament prophecy was fulfilled in him.
72. A. Yusuf Ali, *The Holy Qur'an*, p. 85, n. 416. Yusuf Ali goes further in a footnote to Quran 61:6: "'Ahmad,' or 'Muhammad,' the Praised One, is almost a translation of the Greek word Periclytos. In the present Gospel of John, xiv. 16, xv. 26, and xvi. 7, the word 'Comforter' in the English version is for the Greek word 'Paracletos,' which means 'Advocate,' one called to the help of another, a kind friend rather than 'Comforter.' Our doctors contend that Paracletos is a corrupt reading for Periclytos, and that in their original saying of Jesus there was a prophecy of our holy Prophet Ahmad by name." See A. Yusuf Ali, *The Holy Qur'an*, p. 1540, n. 5438.
73. The Greek *kappa* (κ) is usually transliterated with a *k*, so the spelling would ordinarily be *parakletos*, not *paracletos*.
74. Lewis, "Attributes of God," 492.
75. Timothy George, *Is the Father of Jesus the God of Muhammad? Understanding the Differences between Christianity and Islam* (Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2002), 82.
76. A. Yusuf Ali, *The Holy Qur'an*.
