<!-- page-111 -->

# Chapter 5

# The Bible: God's Big Story, Part 1

## 1. The Cameras Are Rolling

All the best fairy tales begin, "Once upon a time." Then comes a description of the world of the story, of the way that world goes, of where the story is happening, and of why—because if we know the story's world, we can appreciate fully both the rising conflict's true horror and the hero whose sacrifice sets everything right.

<!-- page-112 -->

The Bible treats God's story as the true story that makes sense of all the other stories. The world it describes is his world. As poet Gerard Manley Hopkins put it, "The world is charged with the grandeur of God."¹ Yet humanity has fallen under evil's assault and has been catapulted into vast spiritual and moral darkness. But—as in *The Hobbit* when daylight broke just in time, turning the cannibal trolls into stone—Paul tells us that hope broke through this world, just in time. "When the fullness of time had come, God sent forth his Son" (Gal. 4:4).

> **The Bible treats God's story as the true story that makes sense of all the other stories.**

What's different about God's story is that we are in it. It's being filmed right now. The cameras are rolling. We are on the set. In fact, we are among its actors.

Now, we know how the story ends. If we've looked ahead, we know that God is, in Christ, "making all things new" (Rev. 21:5). But what happens in the meantime? What's our next line? What role are we playing in the story? There's only one way to know: read the script.

That script, of course, is the Bible. As we've seen, the Bible, this diverse collection of writings by many different authors who span a millennia and a half, linked together by the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, addresses distinct audiences and historical circumstances. Yet the Bible possesses an overarching unity centered on *God's working in and through his people*. Its story's climax is in the work of the God-man, Jesus Christ: his birth, death, resurrection, and ascension.

In all of this, the Bible tells the story of the world, to which God's very existence is the prelude. It is therefore God's story. In the Bible, we learn not of ourselves, at least not at first, but about the God who lives and reigns and who is not silent.

God is the first speaker in the Bible: "Let there be light" (Gen. 1:3). A simple sentence. No hammering, no sawing. Just the sound of God's voice turning *nothing* into *something*. As Paul David Tripp puts it, "God reveals himself, his plan, and his purpose in words.… All of his other means of self-revelation were explained and defined by this one central means."²

When God commanded it to, impenetrable murkiness became brilliantly illuminated. Plants and animals came to life. And then God created humans, his image bearers, and spoke to them: "Be fruitful and multiply and fill the earth and subdue it, and have dominion over the fish of the sea and over the birds of the heavens and over every living thing that moves on the earth.… And God saw everything that he had made, and behold, it was very good" (Gen. 1:28–31).

It wasn't just what God said but more so how he said it that is important. Lots of people think the God of the Bible is like the gods of other stories: distant, inaccessible, and contemptuous of humanity. They might imagine God speaking like this:

> It is to be considered an axiomatic imperative for you to consummate your consanguinity and proliferate through the Diaspora, acclimating your autonomous ego to the vicinity in which you must tenaciously subjugate, and exercise prepotency over the ichthyoids of the oceanica and the columbiformes of the caelum and of the animated quadrupeds that traverse the terra firma. (And all the people heard God's voice and said, "Huh?")

<!-- page-113 -->

But it didn't happen like that. God spoke so that people could understand him. And what God spoke of is a *very good* plan for human beings. "God saw everything that he had made, and behold, it was very good" (Gen. 1:31). In Hebrew, the phrase *very good* is *tob meod* (pronounced Tōve MAY-owed). It means exceedingly, heartbreakingly, abundantly, richly, loudly, immeasurably good in a festive, generous, happy, intelligent, charming, splendid way.³ God's plan is not only good, but it is *very* good. To those who think Christianity is basically a dismal set of perplexing rules, this may come as a surprise. Still, it's true!

In studying God's very good plan, it helps to know about **metanarrative**, the idea that an overarching story can explain the world and everything in it. In its flow and coherence, the Bible offers a metanarrative. In this chapter, we'll look at the concept of metanarrative and dig into Act 1 of the drama: creation of the story that Scripture presents. In the next chapter, we'll look at the rest of the story: the fall of humanity, from which we still suffer today, and God's plan for redemption. First, let's see if we can better grasp the idea of metanarrative.

> **Metanarrative:** a single, overarching interpretation, or grand story, of reality.

## 2. Metanarrative: The Story of Scripture

When we say the Bible is a story, some people may think we are demoting it to the level of, say, Dr. Seuss's *Horton Hears a Who*. "There are lots of stories," someone might say. "How could you relegate the Bible to nothing more than one of those?"

First, we need to distinguish between good stories and bad stories. A story is not good just because it is long and complex. There's more to it. Look closely and you'll find the following elements in all well-written stories:

- **A theme.** There may be many subplots, but there will be one overarching plot that brings everything else into focus.
- **Tension rising and being resolved.** A good story features competing voices and counterpoints that get worked out within the larger story line.
- **Diversity within unity.** Like a fascinating painting, unity is not a stark oneness but rather a coming together of a multitude of details. In a good story, the reader is able to see how all of the details weave together by the end.

We find each of these elements in the Bible. The Bible, at heart, tells a story that is diverse but unified, with tensions that are resolved and an overarching plot that holds the story together. Even a quick glance shows that it doesn't resemble a textbook, an encyclopedia, or other books whose primary purpose is to list facts. The Bible is telling a story, but it's a particular type of story.

About half of the Bible can be classified as **historical narrative**,⁴ while the rest—including wisdom literature, poetry, prophecies, and letters to churches—are books

> **Historical Narrative:** a story of historical events.

<!-- page-114 -->

written from within that narrative. All together, the books of the Bible unfold the story of human history from beginning to end.

To best understand how the diverse books of the Bible come together in one coherent story, we must grasp the kind of story a metanarrative is. *Narrative* means "story," and *meta* means "beyond." A metanarrative is the *story beyond the story*—the story by which we make sense of all stories.

All worldviews offer a metanarrative. Here are some examples:

- The Marxist idea that all history can be explained by the conflict of economic classes of people leading to an inevitable communist utopia
- The Secularist idea that all living organisms evolve gradually through natural selection
- The Mormon idea that God has revealed his final will through the Book of Mormon and that following its precepts enables a person to become God and secure a celestial kingdom
- The Islamic idea that the spread of the *ummah*, or the Muslim community, is universal and inevitable
- The New Age idea that we are all progressing toward inner enlightenment on our journey to joining the universal spirit of the universe
- The Postmodernist idea that all metanarratives are inescapably and universally used to oppress others

> **Ummah:** from the Arabic word for "nation"; the collective community of Muslims around the world.

Similarly, the Christian worldview offers a metanarrative, which helps us make sense of the Bible. If God is the ultimate divine author of Scripture, it would make sense that the details and subplots of the Bible come together, telling one story. However, the Bible's story is not just any story: it is true.

When theologians speak of the Bible being true, they first describe the Bible as *comprehensive*, in that it accounts for all the information of which it speaks. Second, despite its diversity, the Bible is *coherent*. The fact that the details from so many human authors cohere suggests that God was the ultimate author superintending its writing. Finally, it is *normative* because as it encompasses all of reality, it calls for a response from all its participants (i.e., the actors: you and me).⁵

## 3. Can Metanarratives Be True?

Of course, a metanarrative is not true just because it exists or merely because people believe it. A narrative must meet the tests of reality we examined in chapter 2. Not all metanarratives are equally valid: some were imagined and others actually happened. We are claiming that the Bible is, as J. R. R. Tolkien persuaded a reluctant C. S. Lewis, the great *myth* that became fact. Tolkien, it must be noted, was using the term *myth* in a different way than we

<!-- page-115 -->

use it today: Tolkien meant a "narrated worldview." All cultures, in this sense, have myths or stories that create their worldview; even the Bible, according to Tolkien's definition, qualifies as myth. But the biblical myth, in *having become* fact—in *having actually happened*—explains how other myths might ring true, because they, though incomplete and imperfect, are actually grasping for fulfillment through Christianity.⁶

Many postmodern scholars believe, however, that all metanarratives should be regarded with suspicion—that no overarching story of life actually moves us closer to the truth about all reality. French philosopher Jean-François Lyotard even defined Postmodernism as an "incredulity toward metanarratives."⁷ To Lyotard, broad explanations are arrogant: How can we assume that what is true in our experience is true for everyone in the world?

Lyotard's starting assumption is that people who write about the past are biased. They might write what is factual to them, but for everyone else whose cultural experiences are different, their writing is mere fiction.

Historians do have worldviews just like everyone else. They have a set of answers to life's ultimate questions that affect how they see the world and what they think ought to happen in the future. And, like everyone else, they are emotionally invested in their beliefs. But does this mean that all writing about history is hopelessly biased?

Professional historians once attempted to eliminate personal biases in their writing.⁸ In today's culture clashes, though, many believe no such escape is possible. Take, for instance, the widespread belief in the Middle East that the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, were a Jewish plot to encourage America to pursue a more aggressive policy against Muslims.⁹ Is this true or false? Can it be true for some and false for others?

Whether "the Jews" orchestrated the 9/11 attacks is either true for everyone in the world or it is false.¹⁰ It is not just a matter of intellectual curiosity, as it would determine how justice is pursued, how nations interact with one another, and so forth.

So although Postmodernism helps us to be appropriately wary about "just so" stories and alerts us to how our cultural biases can affect how we read, it is going too far to suggest that all historical accounts are fictional.¹¹ In fact, saying that all historical accounts are fictional commits two serious errors. First, it dismisses the fact that some historical accounts reveal the truth and others *conceal* it. The former Soviet Union, for instance, concealed the truth by teaching through its government-sanctioned history textbooks that Joseph Stalin was the epitome of virtue. In reality, he was a mass murderer.¹² Eyewitnesses revealed the truth, describing the atrocities and mass graves of the slaughtered. Continued research reveals the historical truth about Stalin, as well as Lenin and China's Mao Tse-tung.¹³

Second, lumping all historical accounts together as fiction minimizes the significance of such atrocities. Historians telling about these crimes are doing far more than just socially constructing reality or manifesting a political bias. Real people died. It is ludicrous to pretend we don't know why. Hard-core Postmodernists may not be willing to admit this, but we must be sensible about it.

We examined in previous chapters some of the many good reasons to trust the Bible, focusing mainly on evidence external to the biblical account. In this chapter and in the next, we focus on the internal consistency of the Bible and show that its sheer coherence makes it very unlikely that it was manufactured for someone's selfish purposes. Viewing the Bible as a metanarrative helps us see how this is so.

<!-- page-116 -->

## 4. Why Approach the Bible as a Metanarrative?

Humans think in stories. We see our lives as stories and remember stories told by others. When it comes to answering questions such as *Where did I come from? Who am I? What is my purpose in life? What is wrong with this world? What is the solution? Where am I going after I die?* we find answers from within a narrative. It's like a jigsaw puzzle. We're more likely to believe that the picture being created is actually meaningful if we can see how the pieces fit together.

Although the Bible is embedded with propositions, as we recognized in previous chapters, it is not organized as a "Frequently Asked Questions" list. Instead, we discover the truth about God as we contemplate the Bible's historical narratives, poetry, prophecy, and letters. The Bible's metanarrative is thorough yet accessible to readers of all ages and levels of education.¹⁴

It's also worth noting that the *Bible* understands the Bible within its metanarrative! Biblical authors seem overwhelmingly conscious of the fact that they are operating within a larger story. For example, the gospel of Mark says, "The beginning of the gospel of Jesus Christ, the Son of God.… Now after John was arrested, Jesus came into Galilee, proclaiming the gospel of God, and saying, 'The time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is at hand; repent and believe in the gospel'" (1:1, 14–15). Mark actually *tells* us he is writing about the gospel of Jesus *and* that this gospel participates in the larger story of life *and* that the climax of the story is the ministry of Jesus.

The apostle Paul also recognized the historical significance of his ministry. Romans 1:1–6 says,

> Paul, a servant of Christ Jesus, called to be an apostle, set apart for the gospel of God, which he promised beforehand through his prophets in the holy Scriptures, concerning his Son, who was descended from David according to the flesh and was declared to be the Son of God in power according to the Spirit of holiness by his resurrection from the dead, Jesus Christ our Lord, through whom we have received grace and apostleship to bring about the obedience of faith for the sake of his name among all the nations, including you who are called to belong to Jesus Christ.

The story began long before Paul was born and before Jesus came to earth, and Paul sees his own ministry in light of the big story we all take part in.

The people in Jesus's life also knew they were part of something special. Jesus's mother, Mary, sensing her part in a bigger story, sang a song we now know as the Magnificat, a beautiful statement of faith in God for his deliverance (Luke 1:46–55). Zechariah, the father of John the Baptist, also knew he was part of God's grand narrative (Luke 1:5–25), and so did the prophetess Anna (Luke 2:36–38).¹⁵ When Jesus was a baby, a devout man named Simeon came into the temple and blessed him, having been informed by the Holy Spirit that Jesus was the Christ. In his blessing he said, "Lord, now you are letting your servant depart in peace, according to your word; for my eyes have seen your salvation that you have prepared in the presence of all peoples, a light for revelation to the Gentiles, and for glory to your people Israel" (Luke 2:29–32). All throughout Scripture, the biblical characters come to life as people who sense that they are part of something bigger than themselves—of something God is doing all over the world. So how does that bigger story play out?

<!-- page-117 -->

## 5. Outlines of the Biblical Metanarrative

There are several ways to understand the metanarrative of Scripture. Church of England cleric Vaughan Roberts describes it concisely as "the kingdom of God: God's people in God's place under God's rule and blessing."¹⁶ For Roberts, the Old Testament gives the pattern of the kingdom, shows how it perished, envisions the promise of a coming restoration, shows that restoration partially, and prophesies about its completion. The New Testament describes the present kingdom, proclaims its presence, and describes what it will be like when perfected.

Authors Craig Bartholomew and Michael Goheen summarize the biblical story as a six-act drama of the kingdom of God.¹⁷ In Act 1, God establishes his kingdom through creation. In Act 2, humans rebel. In Act 3, God the king initiates redemption by choosing the nation of Israel. In Act 4, Christ comes as king and accomplishes redemption. In Act 5, the news of the king's redemption spreads, and this forms the church, first from Jerusalem to Rome and then into the entire world. Act 6 describes the return of the king and completion of God's plan of redemption.

Kenneth Turner, a Bible professor at Bryan College, provides a synthesized approach that focuses on both the flow of Scripture and God's kingdom work.¹⁸ Here's a summary chart, adapted from Bartholomew and Goheen's outline of the drama, that we'll unpack in a moment.

| Act | Kingdom | Creation–Fall–Redemption | Primary Texts |
|-----|---------|--------------------------|---------------|
| 1 | *God Creates His Kingdom* | Creation | Genesis 1–2 |
| 2 | *Rebellion in God's Kingdom* | Fall | Genesis 3–11 |
| 3 | *Promise of Restoration: Israel's Mission* | Redemption Initiated: Promise and God's Plan for Israel (and the World) | Pentateuch (Genesis 12; Exodus 19; Deuteronomy 4) |
| | | Redemption Complicated: Israel's Failure and God's Covenant Faithfulness [Israel's Kingdom] | Historical Books, Wisdom Literature (2 Samuel 7) |
| | | Redemption Predicted: The Rise of the Prophets | Prophets, Postexilic & Intertestamental Literature (Jeremiah 31) |
| 4 | *Kingdom Restored: Jesus's Mission* | Redemption Accomplished | Gospels |
| 5 | *Kingdom Displayed: Church's Mission* | Redemption Applied: The Church | Acts; Epistles |
| 6 | *Consummation of God's Kingdom* | Redemption Completed: New Creation | Revelation |

<!-- page-118 -->

Understanding the big picture of Scripture is how we understand the ways in which God has revealed himself. In a previous chapter, we discussed the fact that God has both **incommunicable attributes** (those he does not share with people) and **communicable attributes** (attributes that humans share and embody). For example, only God is holy (set apart), eternal (has always existed), omniscient (all-knowing), omnipotent (all-powerful), omnipresent (everywhere present), and unchanging. On the other hand, God allows humanity to have wisdom, righteousness, love, mercy, and grace. But with the exception of such passages as Exodus 34:6–7,¹⁹ God's attributes are not usually presented in Scripture in list form. Typically, God instead reveals himself as characters are formed in a novel, through a progression of seeing him act and speak.

> **Incommunicable Attributes:** qualities that belong to only God, such as being holy, eternal, omniscient, omnipotent, omnipresent, and unchanging.

> **Communicable Attributes:** qualities that God and human beings share, such as wisdom, righteousness, love, mercy, and grace.

Rather than relying on selective verses or personal hunches, if people instead allowed the metanarrative of Scripture to inform their views of God, they would be less confused about him, his world, and how he relates to his creation. As it is, confusion abounds. Television personality Oprah Winfrey, for instance, once stated that the Bible described a God who was jealous of her.²⁰ In typical English usage, jealousy is a petty characteristic. Winfrey concluded that God, if he is jealous of her success (to her way of thinking, God was trying to get her to *not* be successful), must be a petty person. But there is another sense in which jealousy is a good thing, not a bad thing, such as a mother being protective of a child threatened with attack or a husband being protective of his wife being stalked by a stranger. If Winfrey had understood what the term *jealous* means biblically—that God is jealous for his glory ("You shall have no other gods before me," Exod. 20:3) and that this jealousy is part of God's "showing steadfast love to thousands" of those who love him and keep his commandments (Exod. 20:5–6)²¹—perhaps she would not have been so quick to reject God.

Understanding the big picture of Scripture also helps us resolve apparent contradictions, such as where God's immutability (unchangeableness) seems to contradict passages in which God changes his mind (e.g., 1 Sam. 15:11, 35; Jon. 3:10)²² or passages where God's goodness, justice, and perfection seem to contradict Old Testament laws permitting slavery or commanding the Israelites to wipe out the Canaanites.

Our goal should not be to explain away the more troubling texts; we cannot assume that our limited understanding can perfectly judge the Scriptures. In future chapters, we will discuss how to approach these apparent contradictions. There *are* good answers. Still, God doesn't always seem interested in resolving all of our questions. Like all great stories, there is more to be understood as the narrative unfolds.

Understanding the metanarrative of Scripture also helps us understand ourselves as image bearers of God, even if we never make it past the first three chapters of Genesis. Recall that in Genesis 1:26–28,²³ we see that God is personal and relational. The "let us" phrase (v. 26) is an early indicator that God is triune and therefore in an eternal relationship *within himself*. His desire to relate to his creation, especially human beings, is seen in how he created humans as

<!-- page-119 -->

image bearers. Instead of merely putting up statues of himself, as kings in the Near East were known to do, he creates image bearers who serve as stewards of his creation (Gen.1:26–28; Gen. 2).²⁴ He relates with these image bearers, even walking with them in the garden (Gen. 3:8).²⁵ Throughout Genesis and the rest of the Bible, we learn that this sovereign creator-king chooses human beings over the rest of creation, and Israel over the other nations of the world, through which to initiate his plan of redemption. He is not removed from his creation but, having established a special relationship with them, serves with them as a partner.

Recognizing how God is wise and knowledgeable and patiently instructs, chastens, delivers, and restores his people; how he is faithful to his promises; and how he protects his people against their enemies even while also using them to bring discipline and restoration provides a strong counterpoint to the common impression that God is brooding, grumpy, mean, and distant.

Let's see how this is so by looking at the first act in his great story: creation.

## 6. Act 1: Creation

Most of the creation account is found from Genesis 1:1 to Genesis 2:3 and somewhat in Genesis 2:4–25, but aspects of God's creation are revealed throughout the Scriptures, giving us deeper insight into God's motives and methods. Psalm 8, for example, celebrates creation's wonders:

> O LORD, our Lord,
>     how majestic is your name in all the earth!
> You have set your glory above the heavens.
>     Out of the mouth of babies and infants,
> you have established strength because of your foes, to
>     still the enemy and the avenger.
>
> When I look at your heavens, the work of your fingers,
>     the moon and the stars, which you have set in place,
> what is man that you are mindful of him,
>     and the son of man that you care for him?
>
> Yet you have made him a little lower than the heavenly beings
>     and crowned him with glory and honor.
> You have given him dominion over the works of your hands;
>     you have put all things under his feet,
> all sheep and oxen,
>     and also the beasts of the field,
> the birds of the heavens, and the fish of the sea,
>     whatever passes along the paths of the seas.
>
> O LORD, our Lord,
>     how majestic is your name in all the earth!

<!-- page-120 -->

Other passages offer insight into the process of God's creation, including Job 38–39, which chronicles everything from the making of the stars to the breath of life. Psalms 19 and 104 ascribe glory to God for the creative work he has done. Proverbs 8 says that wisdom was God's companion during the creation. New Testament passages such as Romans 8, Colossians 1, and Hebrews 1 add further insight.²⁶

Much of what has been written about Genesis in the past fifty years has focused on scientific questions about origins, but to fully grasp what Scripture is teaching, we need to understand the literary, historical, and theological contexts as well.²⁷ The **literary context** includes such things as genre, structure, grammar, and a text's place within the larger perspective of all of Scripture. The **historical context** considers the time and place in which the author wrote and what the author and audience would have assumed to be true about life and the world. For instance, the Israelites to whom this account was written would certainly have known creation stories from neighboring countries and, of course, those from Egypt. How would this knowledge affect their understanding of the creation account in Genesis and what the author chose to communicate? The **theological context** includes the balance provided by the whole Bible. How did other authors of the Bible speak of creation, and how did this affect the way their hearers lived their lives and spread the gospel?

> **Literary Context:** the genre, structure, and grammar of a text.

> **Historical Context:** the time, place, culture, and audience of a text.

> **Theological Context:** the theological purpose of a text.

Keep the literary, historical, and theological contexts in mind as we seek to understand what God did in creation. It will help us resolve a common question about Genesis: Do the first two chapters of Genesis present contradictory creation accounts?

### Are There Two Creation Accounts in Genesis?

Once when I was describing the differences between men and women in the biblical account, a person said to me, "You think this only because you choose to believe the second creation account rather than the first, which says men and women were created at the same time." It's a common misperception if we don't understand the Hebrew mind-set. The Hebrews employed a storytelling technique scholars call **recapitulation**, in which the overview is given first and followed by zooming in on key actors.²⁸ You've seen this in movies. In the same way, Genesis 1 offers the big picture of what God did, while Genesis 2 focuses on how God created and relates to the first humans.

> **Recapitulation:** a storytelling technique in which an overview of a story is given before the story is laid out in specific detail.

Although Genesis 1 and Genesis 2 do not present contradictory creation accounts, they do offer different angles from which to see God's creation (see chart that follows).²⁹ In literary style, Genesis 1 is formal and dignified, whereas Genesis 2 is informal and earthy. In Genesis 1, the word for "man," *ādām* in Hebrew, represents both male and

<!-- page-121 -->

female. In Genesis 2, the man represents the *ādām* role. In Genesis 1, God speaks creation into existence. In Genesis 2, the man and woman are handmade. The climax of creation in Genesis 1 is the creation of *ādām*, and the woman is the crowning glory of creation, *'iššâ* ("from man"), in Genesis 2.

And God reveals different aspects of his nature in Genesis 1 and 2. In Genesis 1, God is **transcendent**, or *above* and *outside* of creation. In Genesis 2, God is **immanent**, or *in* the created garden *with* the man and woman.

In some ways, the differences between Genesis 1 and 2 help resolve these two attributes of God's nature that may seem at odds. Only the Christian concept of God holds these two together. Other non-Christian views of God tend to emphasize one or the other.

> **Transcendent:** an attribute of God that describes him as being both above and outside of his creation.

> **Immanent:** an attribute of God that describes him as being both within and among his creation.

| Topic | Genesis 1:1–2:3 | Genesis 2:4–25 |
|-------|-----------------|----------------|
| Literary Style | *Formal, dignified, catechetical* | *Informal, earthy, historiographic* |
| Place of *ādām* in Creation | *Climax of creation* | *Focus of creation* |
| Meaning of *ādām* | *Generic—both male and female* | *Male—"the Man"* |
| Creation of *ādām* | *Special creation (bārā')—as image of God by divine word* | *"Made" as "living being"; "formed" from dust* |
| Relationship between *ādām* and God | *Royal imagery (i.e., "image" as king)* | *Priestly imagery* |
| Relationship between *ādām* and Creation | *Emphasizes distance ("image of God" versus "according to their kind")* | *Emphasizes affinity (made from "ground" [ădāmâ]); as "living being" [nephesh haya])* |
| Climax of Creation | *Creation of ādām* | *Creation of the "woman" ('iššâ) from "man" ('îš) as helper and complement* |

So what are we to learn about God, humans, and the world from the biblical creation account? Here are some important takeaways.

<!-- page-122 -->

### The Creation Account Showcases God's Glory

As we noted earlier, the creation account is first and foremost *about God*. Although Christians might disagree about the "how" and the "when" of creation, we should all agree on the who and the why. God is "who," and his glory is "why."

The two most common Hebrew words for God demonstrate who he is:

- **Elohim** ("God") is a generic designation for deity and focuses on God as the creator of the whole world.
- **Yahweh** ("the LORD") is the personal and covenantal name of God. Preeminently, he is the God who redeemed his people from Egypt and brought them into covenant relationship with himself.

> **Elohim:** from the Hebrew for "deity"; the generic name used in the Old Testament for the creator-God.

> **Yahweh:** from the Hebrew for "I Am"; the personal and covenantal name of God used in the Old Testament.

> **Doxology:** a liturgical or poetic narrative of praise to God.

In Genesis 1, God is referred to as *Elohim*. He is the great creator of the world. Genesis 1 is a **doxology**, a hymn of praise about the only one awesome enough to pull off the creation of the universe.

In Genesis 2:4, God is introduced using both names as *Yahweh Elohim* ("the LORD God"). Together, these two titles showcase God as both the awesome creator and the one who is personally revealed to his people.

### The Creation Account Establishes Order

The Genesis account of creation goes like this: At the beginning of creation, the world was formless, empty, and dark. For the first three days, God formed, filled, and prepared the universe for life. On day one he created light to fill the darkness and separated day from night. On day two he created the upper and lower waters and separated them from the land. Then for the next three days, God made vegetation and filled the world with living creatures. On day six he put living creatures on the land and made human beings to be stewards of them. On day seven he rested and appreciated his work.

Seven days. One week.

Why is this worth noting? Think of this: the *year* (the time it takes the earth to orbit the sun) is a natural part of creation. A *month* (the time it takes the moon to orbit the earth) is also a natural part of creation, as is a *day* (the time it takes the earth to complete its rotation).

But a week? A week is different. It isn't built naturally into the cosmos, as are the year, month, and day. Instead, the concept of a seven-day week exists in the mind of God, drawing our attention to him each time we rest at the end of our labors.³⁰

Atheists throughout history have sought to abolish the idea of the seven-day week and the setting apart of one day as the Sabbath. Voltaire, the deistic French revolutionary,

<!-- page-123 -->

declared, "If you want to kill Christianity, you must abolish Sunday."³¹ So in 1795, the committee governing the French Revolution decreed a new calendar in which each month would have three ten-day weeks (with five extra days at the end of the year). This eliminated Sundays and holidays (holy days), but after ten years, the system was abolished. People longed for the traditional system of religious observances, which also, according to many historians, was healthier for people and animals and had beneficial effects on commerce.³²

In 1929 another atheistic government, the USSR, tried to abolish the seven-day week by decreeing a week of five days. This time the experiment lasted eleven years before the seven-day week was once again acknowledged.³³

Perhaps, then, we ought to reconsider. Although not as obvious as the year, the month, or the day, the week is a natural part of creation—but *deeply* so, built not into the orbits of Earth and moon but into our sense of work and rest. To ignore a weekly Sabbath is to ignore the way God created the world to work.

God himself set the precedent for a day of rest after working hard for six days. The idea of a day to rest, renew, and reflect is known as the *Sabbath* in Jewish and Christian traditions. Jews rest on Saturday to commemorate God's rest from creation, and Christians rest on Sunday to commemorate the resurrection.³⁴

### The Creation Account Confronts Paganism

The portrayal of God in Genesis 1 confronts the pagan gods and popular creation stories with which the Hebrews would have been familiar. Two of these creation myths include the *Enuma Elish* (the Egyptian Memphite Creation text) and the Phoenician cosmogony of Philo of Byblos. Some secular scholars have argued that the Hebrew account stole from these. However, though the Old Testament shares some commonalities with other creation stories (for example, a three-tiered universe), there are far more differences than similarities. The Hebrew account is distinctive: Yahweh is an altogether different kind of God, far superior to his would-be rivals.

Turner points out some of the major differences:³⁵

1. **There is one God, not many.** The sun, moon, and sea were viewed as gods in the ancient Near East creation stories. In the biblical narrative, they are just creations.³⁶
2. **The universe has a divine origin.** The universe had a beginning and has not existed eternally.³⁷
3. **Creation is perfect.** God's Spirit hovered over the waters, superintending every aspect of creation. The pagan stories offer up a creation full of imperfections.³⁸
4. **Creation resulted from God speaking.** Many creation stories are of a divine power struggle. For example, in the *Enuma Elish*, Marduk creates the heavens and earth from the body of the defeated goddess Tiamat. The God of the Bible spoke creation into existence *ex nihilo* (out of nothing).³⁹

<!-- page-124 -->

5. **God is spirit.** The pagan gods featured in other ancient Near East creation stories were not only embodied but were sexually active, power hungry, and petty.⁴⁰
6. **God organized creation in a structured and orderly way.** In Genesis 1, plants and animals are created "according to their kinds." This is far different from the birth of bizarre forms in the pagan omen texts.⁴¹
7. **Humanity has a special place.** In the biblical narrative, human beings are divinely created to bear the *imago Dei*, the Latin term for "image of God." This is far different from pagan creation stories in which humans are slaves of the gods and only special classes of people (such as pharaohs) bear God's image. Even in Islam, which is theistic (belief in one God) and largely affirms the biblical account of creation, humans are viewed as slaves of God rather than his image bearers.⁴² Imagine the Israelites' amazement at learning, after four hundred years of captivity in Egypt, that their identity is fundamentally that of bearing God's image rather than being slaves to their masters and the gods.⁴³
8. **God rests.** God enjoys and takes pleasure in his creation and even creates space and time in which to enjoy it. This is in stark contrast to the perpetual restlessness of the pagan gods.⁴⁴

> **Atheism:** the belief that God does not exist.

> **Polytheism:** the belief in a multitude of deities.

> **Naturalism:** the belief that all phenomena can be explained in terms of natural causes.

> **Pantheism:** the belief that everything in the universe is ultimately divine.

> **Panentheism:** the belief that God is in everything.

> **Astrology:** the belief that astronomical events affect human events and that human beings can gain insight by studying the movements and positions of celestial bodies.

In other words, Genesis chapters 1 and 2 present a creation account that deliberately clashes with the cosmology (nature of God and origin of the universe) of ancient Israel's neighbors and many of the ideas developed since then as well. The biblical creation account

- affirms the direct hand of one God in every phase of creation;
- rejects **atheism** (no God), **polytheism** (more than one God), and **naturalism** (everything that exists can be explained through natural processes);
- affirms the distinction between creation and the creator;
- rejects **pantheism** (God *is* creation), **panentheism** (God is *in* creation), and **astrology** (creation controls God);

<!-- page-125 -->

- affirms that creation is purposeful and good;
- rejects **deism** (God and creation do not interact), **gnosticism** (the material world is evil), **agnosticism** (uncertainty about God's existence and purpose), and **nihilism** (total purposelessness);
- affirms the special creation of humanity;
- rejects evolutionary theories that propose that all life arose merely through random chance processes, without God's guiding hand to ordain and classify it according to his purpose.

> **Deism:** the belief that God exists and created the world but currently stands completely aloof from his creation; the belief that reason and nature sufficiently reveal the existence of God but that God has not revealed himself through any type of special revelation.

> **Gnosticism:** a second-century heretical Christian movement that taught that the material world was created and maintained by a lesser divine being, that matter and the physical body are inherently evil, and that salvation can be obtained only through an esoteric knowledge of divine reality and the self-denial of physical pleasures.

> **Agnosticism:** the belief that knowledge of God is ultimately inaccessible or unknowable.

> **Nihilism:** the view that the world and human existence are without meaning, purpose, comprehensible truth, or essential value.

### The Creation Account Establishes Humans as the Climax of Creation

That human beings were given God's image exposes a false picture many have of God—that he is stern, ever disapproving. Genesis 1:26–27 says,

> Then God said, "Let us make man in our image, after our likeness. And let them have dominion over the fish of the sea and over the birds of the heavens and over the livestock and over all the earth and over every creeping thing that creeps on the earth." So God created man in his own image, in the image of God he created him.

The word *image* appears dozens of times in the Bible. Almost all the other occurrences than this first one refer to graven images (carved idols). Rarely does the word *image* refer directly to the image of God or the image of Christ. Three of those rare occurrences are in this one passage. This ought to get our attention.

So what does *image* mean? Genesis 1 uses two words that reinforce one another, making God's perspective clear:

- **Image:** *Tselem*—shape, resemblance
- **Likeness:** *Demooth*—model, shape, bodily resemblance

Image was a very important concept in the ancient Near Eastern culture in which the Bible was written.

<!-- page-126 -->

Kings set up images of themselves in conquered cities to remind people who was in charge. An image symbolized authority over a certain domain.⁴⁵

God's domain is the entire universe, but he didn't set up a statue of himself on the earth. He took the dust of earth, breathed into it, and created a living, moving representation of his image. In fact, whenever people tried to make statues of God (or other gods), he condemned them. Jeremiah 51:17 says, "Every man is stupid and without knowledge; every goldsmith is put to shame by his idols, for his images are false, and there is no breath in them."

People make images of gods as a way of trying to control the divine. Images compress the grandeur, power, and eternality of God into a little statue to be displayed or hidden as needed. Idols of any kind strangle aliveness into stillness.

As image bearers of God, we don't give shape to ourselves. Instead, we take on God's "shape." As sons and daughters resemble their parents, we resemble God. His view of humanity directly contradicts scientists who merely view human beings as highly functioning blobs of protoplasm or radical environmentalists who place animals on par with people. The way God created humanity is a profound statement about what it means to be human, so profound that all other insights and understanding of our lives come forth from it.

Here are some significant ways the Bible emphasizes the special place humans have in creation:

- Humans were created last; all of creation seemed to be preparation for humanity's arrival.
- Humans were the product of divine deliberation (God said, "Let us make man in our image" in Gen. 1:26).⁴⁶
- The creation of humans is described as more intensive and extensive than any other creative act.
- Scripture uses a special word for "create" (*bara'*), which always involves a special creative act of God (Gen. 1:1, 21, 27; 2:3).⁴⁷
- Although each act of creation was described as "good," the creation of humanity was evaluated by God with the superlative "*very* good" (Gen. 1:31).⁴⁸
- Humans possess exalted status over other creatures, as bearers of God's image (Gen. 1:26–27).⁴⁹

> **Cosmology:** the study of the structure, origin, and design of the universe.

> **Anthropology:** the study of humanity's origins, cultures, and behavior.

Just as Genesis 1 and other passages about creation confront pagan ideas of God and the universe (**cosmology**), Genesis 2 and other passages about the creation of humanity confront pagan ideas about humanity (**anthropology**). For example, the biblical creation account

<!-- page-127 -->

- affirms the direct hand of God in the creation of humanity; all humans came from a single pair;
- rejects theories claiming that all life arose from a single self-replicating molecule, or even the evolution of humans from several sources (**polygenesis**), which gave rise to the pseudoscience that supported racist views in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries;
- affirms the superiority of humanity over other creatures;
- rejects the "Who are we to say we are any better than any other creature?" claims from radical environmentalist and animal rights groups;
- rejects neopagan and New Spiritualist theories claiming that humans are no more an expression of the divine than any other living thing;
- rejects the postmodern view that humans are nothing more than social constructions;
- affirms the dignity of all humans;
- rejects the devaluation of persons based on gender, race, intelligence, physical form, or circumstances of conception;
- affirms the male/female distinction;
- rejects the splintering of male/female sexual differences into socially constructed gender preferences;
- affirms the honoring of human procreation;
- rejects the devaluation of sex by denying its proper context of man/woman marriage; affirms the wholeness of human personhood;
- rejects the devaluation of humans as either solely material (**materialism**) or immaterial (**asceticism**);
- affirms the sanctity of human life;
- rejects elective abortion and infanticide;
- affirms the sanctity of work;
- rejects laziness;

> **Polygenesis:** the evolution of species from several independent sources.

> **Eugenics:** a social movement advocating the genetic improvement of the human race through such practices as selective breeding, compulsory sterilization, forced abortions, and genocide.

> **Materialism:** the belief that reality is composed solely of matter.

> **Asceticism:** the practice of avoiding all forms of indulgence.

<!-- page-128 -->

- affirms gender equality;
- rejects the devaluation of either men or women (**misandry** or **misogyny**).

> **Misandry:** the hatred or dislike of men.

> **Misogyny:** the hatred or dislike of women.

Making humans responsible for such a vast domain pleased God. Genesis 1:31 says, "God saw everything that he had made, and behold, it was very good. And there was evening and there was morning, the sixth day." As we saw earlier, the Hebrew phrase for "very good" is *tob meod*, which communicates great awe and wonder—goodness so good that it makes one want to burst from sheer joy.

We should stand amazed by this. God created the planets and the stars and called them good. He created the fish and the animals and called them good. But when he created human beings and gave them dominion, he pronounced his plan "very good." We bear God's image as rulers of creation. We do not rule for ourselves. Rather, we are stewards, or "viceroys" (vice-regents ruling on the king's behalf). God owns it all but is pleased for us to produce and initiate to increase creation's value.

### The Creation Account Gives Meaning to Humanity's Mission

"And God blessed them" (Gen. 1:28a). The creation of man and woman was not a curse; it was something great and exciting. "And God said to them, 'Be fruitful and multiply and fill the earth and subdue it, and have dominion'" (Gen. 1:28b). God was interested in abundance. Not scarcity, not just enough to get by, not just make-do. Abundance. As author and public speaker Andy Crouch puts it in his book *Culture Making*, God wanted "teeming 'swarms of living creatures.'"⁵⁰

The words for "work" and "keep" in Hebrew mean to work or serve, to teach, to exercise great care over. Adam was to teach the earth what to do. In essence, God was saying, "See that peach tree? I want more peaches out of that. See that wheat field? I want a higher yield out of it. I want more of everything. I want more *quality* and I want more *quantity*."

The word *dominion* makes people nervous, but it shouldn't. It simply means having responsibility for a certain domain. If you have a family, you have responsibility in the family domain; if you have a job, you have responsibility in the vocational domain. The domain God gave humans is

> "over the fish of the sea and over the birds of the heavens and over every living thing that moves on the earth." And God said, "Behold, I have given you every plant yielding seed that is on the face of all the earth, and every tree with seed in its fruit. You shall have them for food. And to every beast of the earth and to every bird of the heavens and to everything that creeps on the earth, everything that has the breath of life, I have given every green plant for food." (Gen. 1:28–29)

Then "God said to them, 'Be fruitful and multiply and fill the earth and subdue it'" (Gen. 1:28). The word *subdue* means to force into submission. God created the earth with

<!-- page-129 -->

work that needed to be done. It was perfect yet incomplete. That there were unfinished tasks, including both maintenance and further creative work to be accomplished, was not a sign of imperfection.

### The Creation Account Gives Meaning to Sexuality

Before even the first person was made, God designed and announced the categories of "male" and "female" (Gen. 1:27).⁵¹ In other words, they were male and female *before* they were embodied. We may think we are male or female because we have male or female parts, but we were male or female before that. We have been given male or female identities that go beyond our bodies.

This could lead to a lot of interesting theological discussions. I hope it does, but at the very least if God is spirit and does not have a body as we do, and if there is something about us that is spirit as well as body, we're not just matter in motion as Karl Marx said. We're something more than that. We bear God's image in ways that go far beyond the physical.

If you've ever seen a dead person, you know exactly what I mean. You realize, "That's a body, but it's not *them* anymore." Their spirit is gone. The part of them that bore God's image is no longer there.

Our spirits make us recognizable.

It is also at the spiritual level that we recognize the meaningfulness of our relationships to one another. Genesis 2:20 says, "The man gave names to all livestock and to the birds of the heavens and to every beast of the field. But for Adam there was not found a helper fit for him." This was a teachable moment. How many animal pairs would Adam name before he realized that "one of these things was not like the others"?

> This is the cow—Mr. Cow, Mrs. Cow.
>
> This is the giraffe—Mr. Giraffe, Mrs. Giraffe.
>
> This is the bear—Mr. Bear, Mrs. Bear.
>
> This is the donkey—Mr. Donkey, Mrs. Donkey.

At some point Adam surely looked around and realized that there was a Mr. Adam but no Mrs. Adam.

Then it gets even better. Verse 21 says, "So the LORD God caused a deep sleep to fall upon the man, and while he slept took one of his ribs and closed up its place with flesh." The rib he had taken "he made into a woman and brought her to the man. Then the man said, 'This at last is bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh; she shall be called Woman, because she was taken out of Man'" (vv. 22–23).

Do you see what Adam just did? He named her "Woman." He identified her characteristics and took responsibility for her. God gave her to the man, and he instantly realized his bond and his relationship to her and how unique their relationship would be. Hebrew scholars point out that Adam's statement is an explosive cry of surprise and joy—a love poem.⁵²

<!-- page-130 -->

> This at last is bone of my bones
>     and flesh of my flesh;
> she shall be called Woman,
>     because she was taken out of Man. (v. 23)

Adam's poem foreshadows the love song of the Song of Solomon, which expresses the romance of God-given, marital love. Then the Scripture commentary says, "A man shall leave his father and his mother and hold fast to his wife, and they shall become one flesh" (v. 24).

That's interesting because Adam and Eve did not have parents; they were made directly by God. The father and mother were mentioned because God was establishing a prototype. The creation of this man and this woman, the uniting of the two of them together to be one flesh, began a pattern to be adopted by all subsequent human beings.

> **The creation of this man and this woman, the uniting of the two of them together to be one flesh, began a pattern to be adopted by all subsequent human beings.**

The one-flesh relationship is especially important. It doesn't just mean the man and woman were sexually united, though it does have that connotation. The idea of one flesh is one *clan*. God created them as a *family government*. Were Adam and the woman married? Yes, they were. They were made a family by God himself.

Thus, the story of creation begins not with a birth but with a wedding. This is pure beauty. The man and woman were together in a completely trusting relationship, made perfectly for each other, and engrossed in work so profoundly meaningful that it was worshipful. It is a picture of grace, enjoyment, pleasure, fulfillment, work, accomplishment, and satisfaction. All of these went together in creation. And it's worth noting that, at the end of all things, the finale of God's redemptive story is the wedding feast!

## 7. Conclusion

Four word pairs give shape to the biblical creation narrative. God is a God of both *creation* and *covenant*. He was *transcendent* above the world but also *immanent* in it. He made humans to do in creation just as he had done: to *fill* and *form* it. Humans were both *material* and *immaterial*; that is, they had bodies and lived in the physical world, but they also had souls that made their experiences spiritual as well. The biblical narrative presents these not as "either/or" but as "both/and." The complexity is not contradiction, the Bible insists, but rather a healthy tension in the way two pitches of a roof lean on one another and create strength. Christians, too, have often set things up in a false "either/or" fashion:

- You can't focus on both improving the world and preparing people for eternity.
- You can't celebrate valued contributions of humans unless they have a personal relationship with Christ.
- The church has nothing to do with the world.

<!-- page-131 -->

- Now that we have the **special revelation** of the Bible, we no longer need general revelation.
- Making arguments for Scripture based on evidence is bad; we have moved beyond that into a postmodern era.

> **Special Revelation:** God's unique revelation about himself through the Scriptures (Ps. 19:7–11; 2 Tim. 3:14–17), miraculous events (dreams, visions, prophets, prophecy), and Jesus Christ (John 1:1–18).

What would happen if we invited the tension into the discussion rather than trying to eliminate it? Is it possible to focus on "inside" (covenant) issues and on "outside" (creation) concerns at the same time?

After all, even after the fall, the goodness of creation remains, pointing the way to redemption:

- God is still sovereign and in control. Neither his character nor his purposes have changed.
- Creation still reveals God's glory, power, care, and order (Pss. 8; 19; 104; Rom. 1:18–23).
- The creation is still considered "good" (1 Tim. 4:4).⁵³
- Human beings are still fully made in God's image (Gen. 9:6; James 3:9),⁵⁴ and the creation mandate is still intact (Gen. 9:1–7; James 3:7).⁵⁵

Creation was very good, and it still is. But it is marred by something so horrifying that even today, so many thousands of years later, it still gives us a sick feeling. That's what we'll talk about in the next chapter.
<!-- page-131 -->

## Endnotes

1. See "God's Grandeur," by Gerard Manley Hopkins, Poetry Foundation, www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/173660.
2. Paul David Tripp, *War of Words* (Phillipsburg, NJ: Presbyterian and Reformed, 2000), 8.
3. See *meod*, Strong's Hebrew reference number 3966, and *tob*, Strong's Hebrew reference number 2896, in Robert L. Thomas, *New American Standard Exhaustive Concordance of the Bible/Hebrew-Aramaic and Greek Dictionaries*, updated ed. (Nashville: Holman, 1981).
4. Statistics vary. Robert L. Plummer, in *40 Questions about Interpreting the Bible* (Grand Rapids, MI: Kregel, 2010), 191, cites "about 60 percent" for OT and NT combined. Gordon D. Fee and Douglas Stuart, in *How to Read the Bible for All Its Worth*, 3rd ed. (Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2003), 89, suggest that "over 40 percent" of the OT is narrative.
5. The focus on comprehensive and normative is discussed in Craig G. Bartholomew and Michael W. Goheen, *The Drama of Scripture: Finding Our Place in the Biblical Story* (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker, 2004), 20.
6. Alister McGrath, "A Contemporary Philosophy of Persuasion," (lecture, Summit Oxford C. S. Lewis Conference, Oxford, UK, October 7, 2013); http://www.kevinbywater.com/lewis-persuasion-mcgrath.
7. Jean-François Lyotard, *The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge* (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1984), xxiv.
8. See Tom Dixon's essay "Postmodern Method: History," in *The Death of Truth*, ed. Dennis McCallum (Minneapolis: Bethany, 1996), 138–39.
9. Among the conspiracy claims are one asserting that four thousand people of Israeli origin, and presumably Jewish, were absent from the World Trade Center on September 11, 2001. The claim apparently originated from a Syrian newspaper

<!-- page-132 -->

and has been roundly refuted. See web.archive.org/web/20070211085836/http://state.gov/media/Archive/2005/Jan/14-260933.html and www.snopes.com/rumors/israel.asp.
10. We are assuming, of course, that the words *true* and *false* are distinct terms with identifiable essences or properties that present themselves consistently, enabling rational people to distinguish between them. This is disputed by some hardcore Postmodernists, but the fact that they expect their disputations to be taken seriously, even though they are made in words, proves the inherent absurdity of their argument.
11. This is important today because many people, ignorant of what actually happened in history, can fall for the agenda filmmakers want to promote. Films such as *Braveheart*; *Good Night, and Good Luck*; *The Last Temptation of Christ*; and *The Da Vinci Code* leave viewers with a compelling story of the past yet with no way to decipher where history ends and embellishment begins. By weaving together fact and fiction in entertaining ways with attractive actors and engaging story lines, screenwriters, directors, and producers can manipulate the understanding of the average viewer because most are ill-equipped to sort out historical events from imaginative interpretations. See Ben Witherington III, *The Gospel Code: Novel Claims about Jesus, Mary Magdalene and Da Vinci* (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity, 2004).
12. Stephane Courtois et al., *The Black Book of Communism: Crimes, Terror, Repression* (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1999).
13. For example, Jung Chang and Jon Halliday's *Mao: The Unknown Story* (New York: Knopf, 2005) is a definitive study and story of Mao's life and times along with his crimes.
14. Bartholomew and Goheen discuss the reality of competing metanarratives in *The Drama of Scripture*, 18–21. One of the implications is that we (Western Christians) are already confronted with "the humanistic story of Western culture," which seeks to dominate us and even incorporate the Bible within it. Therefore, we must challenge this other story with the biblical story. This is how metanarrative and worldview are intricately connected. To make the point, Bartholomew and Goheen cite works of Lesslie Newbigin, Eugene Peterson, and N. T. Wright.
15. Luke 2:36–38: "There was a prophetess, Anna, of the daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe of Asher. She was advanced in years, having lived with her husband seven years from when she was a virgin, and then as a widow until she was eighty-four. She did not depart from the temple, worshipping with fasting and prayer night and day. And coming up at that very hour she began to give thanks to God and to speak of him to all who were waiting for the redemption of Jerusalem."
16. See the full chart and diagram in Vaughan Roberts, *God's Big Picture: Tracing the Storyline of the Bible*, deluxe ed. (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity, 2003), 149, 157. Roberts's approach is influenced by Graeme Goldworthy, *Gospel and Kingdom* (Exeter, UK: Paternoster, 1981).
17. See the outline in Bartholomew and Goheen, *The Drama of Scripture*, 27. Their outline (and use of drama) expands upon N. T. Wright, *The New Testament and the People of God* (London: SPCK, 1992), 139–43.
18. The rest of this outline will follow the Creation–Fall–Redemption pattern.
19. Exodus 34:6–7: "The LORD passed before him and proclaimed, 'The LORD, the LORD, a God merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and abounding in steadfast love and faithfulness, keeping steadfast love for thousands, forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin, but who will by no means clear the guilty, visiting the iniquity of the fathers on the children and the children's children, to the third and the fourth generation.'"
20. Oprah & Eckhart Tolle: *A New Earth*—Chapter 1, Episode 101, aired 3/23/14, www.oprah.com/own-a-new-earth/Chapter-1-Episode-Guide-for-Oprah—Eckhart-Tolle-A-New-Earth.
21. Exodus 20:5–6: "You shall not bow down to them or serve them, for I the LORD your God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers on the children to the third and the fourth generation of those who hate me, but showing steadfast love to thousands of those who love me and keep my commandments."
22. 1 Samuel 15:11: "I regret that I have made Saul king, for he has turned back from following me and has not performed my commandments." And Samuel was angry, and he cried to the LORD all night; 1 Samuel 15:35: "Samuel did not see Saul again until the day of his death, but Samuel grieved over Saul. And the LORD regretted that he had made Saul king over Israel"; Jonah 3:10: "When God saw what they did, how they turned from their evil way, God relented of the disaster that he had said he would do to them, and he did not do it."
23. Genesis 1:26–28: "God said, 'Let us make man in our image, after our likeness. And let them have dominion over the fish of the sea and over the birds of the heavens and over the livestock and over all the earth and over every creeping thing that creeps on the earth.' So God created man in his own image, in the image of God he created him; male and female he created them. And God blessed them. And God said to them, 'Be fruitful and multiply and fill the earth and subdue it, and have dominion over the fish of the sea and over the birds of the heavens and over every living thing that moves on the earth.'"
24. While the plural reference in "let us" (Gen. 1:26; cf. 3:22; 11:7) is open to interpretation, polytheism is not an option. All the verbs in Genesis 1 with God as subject are singular in the Hebrew.
25. Genesis 3:8: "They heard the sound of the LORD God walking in the garden in the cool of the day, and the man and his wife hid themselves from the presence of the LORD God among the trees of the garden."
26. Hugh Ross provides a list of some of these texts in "The Major Biblical Creation Texts/Creation Accounts," Reasons to Believe, August 1, 2008, www.reasons.org/articles/the-major-biblical-creation-texts-creation-accounts.

<!-- page-133 -->

27. See Kenneth J. Turner, "Teaching Genesis 1 at a Christian College," in *Reading Genesis 1–2: An Evangelical Conversation*, ed. J. Daryl Charles (Peabody, MA: Hendrickson, 2013), chapter 6.
28. Gleason Archer, *A Survey of Old Testament Introduction* (Chicago: Moody, 2007), 135.
29. Chart courtesy of Kenneth Turner, Bryan College. Used by permission.
30. This is based on a teaching by Gregg Harris. For more information, see www.nobleinstitute.org/.
31. Voltaire, *The International Standard Bible Encyclopedia*, vol. 1: A–D, ed. Geoffrey Bromily (Grand Rapids, MI: Erdmans, 1986), 159.
32. See chapter 2, "The Seven Day Wars," in Eviatar Zerubavel, *The Seven Day Circle: The History and Meaning of the Week* (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1985).
33. See chapter 2, "The Seven Day Wars," in Zerubavel, *The Seven Day Circle*.
34. For an excellent essay on the Sabbath, see Abraham Joshua Heschel, "From the Sabbath," in *Leading Lives That Matter: What We Should Do and Who Should We Be*, ed. Mark R. Schwehn and Dorothy C. Bass (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 2006), 216–21.
35. See Kenneth J. Turner, "The Kind-ness of God: A Theological Reflection of Min, 'Kind,'" in *Genesis Kinds: Creationism and the Origin of Species*, ed. Todd C. Wood and Paul A. Garner, Center for Origins Research in Creation (Eugene, OR: Wipf & Stock, 2009), 31–64; Turner, "Teaching Genesis 1."
36. Turner, "Kind-ness of God," 31–64.
37. Turner, "Teaching Genesis 1."
38. Turner, "Kind-ness of God," 31–64.
39. Turner, "Teaching Genesis 1."
40. Turner, "Kind-ness of God," 31–64.
41. Turner, "Kind-ness of God," 31–64.
42. The Quran consistently refers to people as slaves of Allah. See, just as a starting point, 2:23, 2:90, 2:186, 2:207, 3:15, 3:20, 3:30, 3:61, 3:79, 3:182, 4:172, 6:18, 6:88, 7:128, 7:194, 8:51, 9:104, 10:107, 14:11, and 15:49. The Arabic word is *abd*, which means one who is totally subordinated. Badru Kateregga says, "The Christian witness, that man is created in the 'image and likeness of God,' is not the same as the Muslim witness." See Badru D. Kateregga and David W. Shenk, "Islam and Christianity: A Muslim and a Christian in Dialogue," electronically available on *The World of Islam: Resources for Understanding* (Colorado Springs, CO: Global Mapping International, 2000), CD-ROM, 5350.
43. See Turner, "Teaching Genesis 1."
44. Turner, "Teaching Genesis 1."
45. See D. J. A. Clines, "The Image of God in Man," *Tyndale Bulletin* 19 (1968): 53–103, 98.131.162.170//tynbul/library/TynBull_1968_19_03_Clines_ImageOfGodInMan.pdf.
46. The "us" is a matter of interest to theologians, some of whom see it as God meeting with a divine counsel, others as a plural of majesty, and others a pre-announcement of the Trinity of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.
47. Genesis 1:1: "In the beginning, God created the heavens and the earth"; Genesis 1:21: "God created the great sea creatures and every living creature that moves, with which the waters swarm, according to their kinds, and every winged bird according to its kind. And God saw that it was good"; Genesis 1:27: "God created man in his own image, in the image of God he created him; male and female he created them"; Genesis 2:3: "God blessed the seventh day and made it holy, because on it God rested from all his work that he had done in creation."
48. Genesis 1:31: "God saw everything that he had made, and behold, it was very good. And there was evening and there was morning, the sixth day."
49. Genesis 1:26–27: "God said, 'Let us make man in our image, after our likeness. And let them have dominion over the fish of the sea and over the birds of the heavens and over the livestock and over all the earth and over every creeping thing that creeps on the earth.' So God created man in his own image, in the image of God he created him; male and female he created them."
50. Andy Crouch, *Culture Making: Recovering Our Creative Calling* (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity), 106.
51. Genesis 1:27: "God created man in his own image, in the image of God he created him; male and female he created them."
52. R. Kent Hughes, *Genesis: Beginning and Blessing* (Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2004), 61.
53. 1 Timothy 4:4: "Everything created by God is good, and nothing is to be rejected if it is received with thanksgiving."
54. Genesis 9:6: "Whoever sheds the blood of man, by man shall his blood be shed, for God made man in his own image." James 3:9: "With it we bless our Lord and Father, and with it we curse people who are made in the likeness of God."
55. James 3:7: "Every kind of beast and bird, of reptile and sea creature, can be tamed and has been tamed by mankind."
