<!-- page-135 -->

# Chapter 6

# The Bible: God's Big Story, Part 2

## 1. The Rest of the Story

Far too often, the beauty ascribed to creation in Genesis seems like a distant dream. Bad news is everywhere. Every day, headlines betray the cruelty and anguish all too common in the human story:

- "Long-Running US-Russian Feud Reignited"
- "Syrian Troops Ambush Rebels, Kill 62"

<!-- page-136 -->

- "Father of Missing Daughter Pleads for Abductor to Release Her"
- "School Shooting Stuns Community"

That humans do evil should not shock Christians. The **doctrine of original sin** says humans are so *thoroughly* fallen that nothing remains unaffected by our fallenness. It also says we are so *absolutely* fallen that there's nothing we can do to fix ourselves. None of this is hidden from view. Christian apologist G. K. Chesterton thought that original sin was "the only part of Christian theology which can really be proved."¹

> ***Doctrine of Original Sin:*** **the orthodox Christian belief that Adam's first sin corrupted the nature of his descendants, leading to humanity's present propensity toward committing sin.**

All worldviews recognize that something is wrong about the world, but they disagree about what precisely is wrong and what ought to be done about it. The scriptural metanarrative showcases life in a world of sin. Bad people don't just do very bad things and make life miserable for the rest; *each* of us falls short of God's glory. Sin affects all of creation. The proper response is to admit this and be reconciled to God. In Chesterton's reply to a newspaper query about what is wrong with the world, he got straight to the truth: "What's wrong with the world? I am. Yours truly, G. K. Chesterton."²

Scripture, however, does not leave it there. It points to a way out: God's plan for ending sin's dominion altogether. In the previous chapter, we dove deep into the first act in this story: creation. In this chapter, we'll unflinchingly examine Act 2: The fall and then burrow deep into Scripture to see how God patiently moves us into Act 3: Promise of Restoration, Act 4: Kingdom Restored, Act 5: Kingdom Displayed, and Act 6: Kingdom Consummated.

So you can see where we've been and where we're going, here's the chart from chapter 5 representing Craig Bartholomew and Michael Goheen's "drama of Scripture." (I've simplified their act titles for our purpose in this book.)

| Act | Kingdom | Creation–Fall–Redemption | Primary Texts |
|-----|---------|--------------------------|---------------|
| 1 | *God Creates His Kingdom* | Creation | Genesis 1–2 |
| 2 | *Rebellion in God's Kingdom* | Fall | Genesis 3–11 |
| 3 | *Promise of Restoration: Israel's Mission* | Redemption Initiated: Promise and God's Plan for Israel (and the World) | Pentateuch (Genesis 12; Exodus 19; Deuteronomy 4) |
| | | Redemption Complicated: Israel's Failure and God's Covenant Faithfulness [Israel's Kingdom] | Historical Books, Wisdom Literature (2 Samuel 7) |
| | | Redemption Predicted: The Rise of the Prophets | Prophets, Postexilic & Intertestamental Literature (Jeremiah 31) |

<!-- page-137 -->

| Act | Kingdom | Creation–Fall–Redemption | Primary Texts |
|-----|---------|--------------------------|---------------|
| 4 | *Kingdom Restored: Jesus's Mission* | Redemption Accomplished | Gospels |
| 5 | *Kingdom Displayed: Church's Mission* | Redemption Applied: The Church | Acts; Epistles |
| 6 | *Consummation of God's Kingdom* | Redemption Completed: New Creation | Revelation |

## 2. Act 2: The Fall

God originally created human beings and his world in a state of *shalom*. This Hebrew word for "peace," "prosperity," and "welfare" implies that in creation, everything was good and in order. The existence of our first parents was one of wholeness in their relationship with God, one another, and creation. But in the fall, each of these relationships was ruptured. The world is now, as author Cornelius Plantinga puts it, "not the way it's supposed to be."³

What happened? As the creation narrative moves from Genesis 2 to Genesis 3, the focus abruptly changes. A new character, the serpent, comes into the picture. He is "crafty," a word in Hebrew (*'ārûm*) that forms a wordplay with the word for "naked" (*'ārôm*) in Genesis 2:25.⁴ In English, it would read something like this: Adam and Eve were "nude" but the serpent was "shrewd."⁵ The serpent is clearly more than just a reptilian member of the animal kingdom. It is intelligent, it speaks, it asks thought-provoking questions, and it is antagonistic toward both humans and God.

Right away the serpent challenges Eve's understanding of what God has said: "Did God actually say, 'You shall not eat of any tree in the garden?'" It's a simple question, but Eve's response is revealing: "We may eat of the fruit of the trees in the garden, but God said, 'You shall not eat of the fruit of the tree that is in the midst of the garden, *neither shall you touch it*, lest you die.'" But God hadn't said anything about touching it. He merely told them not to eat of it. This is our first indication that something is very wrong. Has Eve misrepresented the truth on purpose? Has she misunderstood? Has Adam given her wrong information?⁶ Either way, this confrontation is what scriptwriters call an inciting incident. Once it occurs, things can never go back to the way they were before.

The Genesis 3 account of the fall of humanity calls forth several perplexing questions.

**Who was the serpent?** The serpent is referred to as one of the wild creatures God made (v. 1),⁷ which would be consistent with the curse about crawling on the belly (v. 14).⁸ Many indicators, including the serpent's actions and the curse against him in verse 15,⁹ support the New Testament identification of the serpent with Satan (Rev. 12:9; 20:2; Rom. 16:20).¹⁰

**What was the nature of the temptation?** The man and woman are tempted with "the knowledge of good and evil." The meaning of this phrase is hard to nail down. It seems that the serpent is offering something to the man and woman that is proper for only God to know (Gen. 3:22).¹¹ Perhaps it has something to do with claiming for themselves the authority to

<!-- page-138 -->

define "good" and "evil." If so, then the temptation to eat from this tree is the temptation to replace God.

**What was the nature of sin?** This first act of sin helps us understand four things about sin's nature:

1. **Sin is an act of unbelief.** It is a refusal to trust God and even a desire to believe the opposite of what he says.
2. **Sin is a desire for autonomy.** The man and woman want to be wise on their own terms rather than on God's.
3. **Sin is an act of irresponsibility.** Although Adam knew the serpent's nature (he had observed its characteristics and named it), he failed to intervene when his wife was under spiritual attack. He needed to be a warrior, and instead he was a wimp.
4. **Sin is an act of rebellion.** Sin is not just the bad things others do to us; it is an active choice to go against what God says is best.

In the end, it's less about the fruit than about the man and woman saying, "God, we don't think your plan is as good as you think it is. *We want what we want, and we want it now.*"

**What were the consequences of sin?** God himself breaks the bad news, first to the serpent and then to Adam and Eve. In Genesis 3:14–15, he tells the "more crafty" (*'ārûm*) serpent that he will be "more cursed" (*'ārûr*), crawling in humiliation and being regarded with fear and contempt. Further, his relationship with Eve will be hostile. This is far more than distrust between humans and animals; it is a picture of the eternal spiritual struggle between humans and Satan.

The consequences of sin for the woman are twofold. Genesis 3:16¹² says she would experience increased pain in childbearing, adding great pain to an event of great blessing. Second, men and women would experience frustration in their relationships. Genesis 3:16b refers to the woman's "desire" to usurp the man's headship, but he will "rule" over her, presumably harshly. What had previously been a relationship of complete oneness and trust would in the future be a grappling for power and control.¹³

> **What had previously been a relationship of complete oneness and trust would in the future be a grappling for power and control.**

To the man the curse is on the ground (Gen. 3:17–19).¹⁴ The earth would rebel against Adam as he had rebelled against God, and only through painful toil would he wring productivity out of the soil.

**What happened as a result of sin?** Genesis 4–11 runs through early human history at a rapid pace, slowing down only for a closer look when Abram comes on the scene in chapter 12. Even though it is a broad overview, the subsequent chapters tell the early history of humanity

<!-- page-139 -->

as one of ever-increasing arrogance, abuse, and death. The impact of the fall multiplies. In Genesis 4:8,¹⁵ Cain murders his brother and is terrorized by his punishment. By the end of the chapter, Lamech murders a man and boasts about being a terrorist (vv. 23–26).¹⁶ Before long, people crave evil (Gen. 6:5).¹⁷

Bracketed by moments of hope, humanity's deterioration continues unabated to this day. "Everyone did what was right in his own eyes" (Judg. 17:6). Humanity's spiritual genes have mutated in such a way that the cell division that keeps us alive is the very thing that kills us. As the saying goes, we are not sinners because we sin; we sin because we are sinners. Sin is in our blood. Death looks to win.

### Counterfeit Ideas about the Fall

In order to understand the world rightly, we must understand the fall; we can fix something only if we first know what is wrong with it. The secular perspective, though, is that nothing (permanently, at least) is wrong. What Christians call sin, Secularists say, is "nothing but a flesh wound" (to quote a reference from comic troupe Monty Python's movie *The Holy Grail*)¹⁸ caused by momentary clumsiness. This false belief is not trivial. Secularists almost universally reject the doctrine of original sin, distorting the Christian story to make their denial seem more plausible. German social psychologist Erich Fromm claims,

> The Christian interpretation of the story of man's act of disobedience as his "fall" has obscured the clear meaning of the story. The biblical text does not even mention the word "sin"; man challenges the supreme power of God, and he is able to challenge it because he is potentially God.¹⁹

Author Wendell W. Watters writes, "The Christian is brainwashed to believe that he or she was born wicked, should suffer as Christ suffered, and should aspire to a humanly impossible level of perfection nonetheless."²⁰ To Watters, the confusion and guilt heaped on Christians promotes mental illness: "A true Christian must always be in a state of torment, since he or she can never really be certain that God has forgiven him or her."²¹ According to this view, though, the biblical God either doesn't exist or is evil. Human flourishing comes by escaping belief in God; Adam and Eve become heroes.

Secularists stray from the truth because of three false assumptions about the self, mind, and mental processes:

- **Humans are good by nature.** Secular psychologists emphatically proclaim our lack of fallenness. Abraham Maslow wrote, "As far as I know we just don't have any intrinsic instincts for evil."²² Atheist philosopher Paul Kurtz saw humans as "perfectible."²³
- **Society and its institutions are responsible for the evil we do.** Carl Rogers said, "I see members of the human species, like members of other species, as essentially constructive in their fundamental nature, but damaged by their experience."²⁴ In other words, humanity as a whole doesn't have a destructive bent.

<!-- page-140 -->

- **Mental health can be restored to those who can overcome psychological guilt.** Because only society is truly evil, Secularists think people's guilt feelings are a false psychological guilt. When people rid themselves of this false guilt, they presumably will be healthy again.²⁵

### Broken Beyond Self-Repair

Christianity disputes the contention that humans are good by nature, that our evil is the responsibility of society and not ourselves, and that all guilt is false guilt. Without question, humanity's fallenness has become embedded in society's institutions. It can be deeply hurtful, and this hurt can include false guilt over things we had no control over. But to conclude that therefore we have no sin nature is to let ourselves off the hook in an unbiblical way. The fall actually happened, Christians say, and it affects us so deeply—both physically and psychologically—that our attempts at self-repair highlight how disgusting our condition really is.

A gentle translation of Isaiah 64:6 says, "All our righteous deeds are as a polluted garment." The actual phrase in Hebrew for "polluted garment" means a rag soaked in menstrual blood. This metaphor—blood—makes us seem worse than we would like to think. And we are worse. Our feeble protests of innocence—"I'm not that bad … it was just a little mistake … it's only a white lie"—do nothing more than deaden our crippled limbs. Our effort to disguise sinful impulses by embracing trendy causes merely spreads the virus of disfiguring superficiality. We are in a million pieces; the more we glue together, the more we disintegrate.

> **What appears to be humanity's unraveling may be, from God's perspective, the beginning of restoration.**

But in another way, what appears to be humanity's unraveling may be, from God's perspective, the beginning of restoration. Perhaps, as in a tapestry viewed from the back, we see incoherence and depravity and rot, but when we view it from the front, we see the intricacy and beauty and hope that has always been there. We long for it to be so. We are beyond desperate. There must be a third act or we die.

## 3. Act 3: Promise of Restoration, Israel's Mission

Act 3, beginning in Genesis 12 and moving through the Old Testament period and the nation of Israel, is our introduction to God's plan of redemption toward a New Testament fulfillment. Act 3 is subdivided into three scenes according to Bartholomew and Goheen: (1) God initiates redemption, (2) Israel's failure complicates things, and (3) redemption continues through the "intertestamental period" (the four-hundred-year gap between the Old Testament's end and the birth of Christ).

As we've seen, Secularists believe that redemption is unnecessary because there is no such thing as a fall.²⁶ Interestingly, though, many Secularists still speak in the language of "becoming," as if humans fall short of their true potential at the present time. This does not mean in their thinking, though, that humanity's state can be described as evil, as Ellis G. Olim takes pains to note: "Man is constantly becoming," he says. "What we want, then, is not to encourage a static type of personality based on traditional notions of right and wrong, but the kind of person who is able to go forward into the uncertain future."²⁷

<!-- page-141 -->

Secularists say that if we are sufficiently enlightened, we can look inward and determine what is right.²⁸ From a biblical perspective, though, people cannot heal themselves; sin is a parasite on humanity. We cannot rid ourselves of it without help. Promising wisdom and freedom, sin worms itself into our lives, and once inside it reproduces uncontrolled. The measures we take to sustain our lives sustain the parasite, giving it more and more strength, more and more power.²⁹

Humanity's natural response to sin is denial, then guilt, then fear, followed by a terrible aloneness. Who could ever love us in such a condition?

But in reality, humanity has never been alone. God's plan of healing began immediately after the sin of our first parents in the garden of Eden. As Act 2 ended, we saw things go from bad to worse: Adam and Eve rejected God's plan and saw tragic results. Sin plagued them and plagues us yet today. It all makes us want to cry out with the apostle Paul, "Wretched man that I am! Who will deliver me from this body of death?" (Rom. 7:24).

> **In reality, humanity has never been alone. God's plan of healing began immediately after the sin of our first parents in the garden of Eden.**

### Grace Is Our Hope

As sad and painful as the Genesis account of sin looks, its discordant notes and lurching rhythms give way to a faint but clear melody of grace. The double feature of Genesis 4, murder (Cain and Lamech) and polygamy (Lamech), is met by the grace of cultural development (vv. 17–22). The continuation of Adam's sinful seed (offspring) is met by the grace of people calling upon the name of Yahweh (vv. 25–26).³⁰ Even in the judgment of the flood (Gen. 6), we see grace in Noah's rescue (v. 8)³¹ and in the covenant renewal and re-creation that immediately follows (9:1–19). In one sense, Noah serves as a new or second Adam.

But the cycle continues. Noah's drunkenness and Ham's sin (vv. 20–25) are followed by God's grace in the continuation of the human race in the table of nations (the listing of the clans of the sons of Noah, Gen. 10). Genesis 11 tells the sad story of the tower of Babel and also the genealogy of Shem (leading to Abram). And so it goes, all throughout Scripture: grace, sin, grace. Humanity simply cannot exile itself from the presence of the one who is everywhere and who plants an act of grace down the road from every sinful act.

### Grace Is the Subtle Subtext of the Curse

God's grace first appears in the middle of sin—in Genesis 3:15—as God announces the consequences of the first disobedience. The defeat of the serpent is promised, as is humanity's victory. This is known as a **protevangelium**, the first announcement that God would provide redemption through the One who would ultimately and finally crush Satan. This is the first promise of Jesus Christ.

> **Protevangelium:** the first gospel or God's first promise of coming redemption through Jesus Christ (Gen. 3:15).

<!-- page-142 -->

We'll divide this cryptic announcement into four lines so we can examine each more carefully (Gen. 3:15 HCSB):

1. *I will put hostility between you and the woman,*
2. *and between your seed and her seed.*
3. *He will strike your head*
4. *and you will strike his heel.*

Based on two grammatical oddities in the text, we can see that God is up to something monumental. First is the imbalance in the description of the opponents through the lines of the verse. Lines 1–2 show same-generation opponents: the serpent versus the woman (line 1), then the serpent's seed versus the woman's seed (line 2). But lines 3–4 switch things up: the woman's seed ("He") does not battle the serpent's seed but rather the *serpent himself*. The serpent is doomed to live through the ages and be met in every generation by fresh reinforcements springing forth from the woman.

> **It seems that God is communicating that although there will ultimately come *one* who is the seed of the woman and will destroy evil forever, in the meantime all human offspring have the potential to be destroyers of Satan's work.**

The second oddity stems from the word translated "seed" (Hebrew *zéra'*). This Hebrew word is a collective noun. Like the English word *sheep*, it is grammatically singular but can be used as both singular and plural. To discern whether a collective noun is to be singular or plural, we must understand the context. If a farmer says, "I'm going to shear my sheep," we don't know whether he has one sheep or a flock of sheep. But if he follows that sentence by saying, "It won't be easy because she's a little ornery," then we know he's talking about just one animal.

The context of Genesis 3:15 indicates that *both* singular and plural meanings are intended. The most natural reading is to take the serpent's "seed" and the woman's "seed" as plural—multiple offspring. But the singular "he/his" in lines 3–4 suggests the possibility that a true singular is intended. It seems that God is communicating that although there will ultimately come *one* who is the seed of the woman and will destroy evil forever, in the meantime all human offspring have the potential to be destroyers of Satan's work.³²

### Grace Is Not Merely a New Testament Phenomenon

If we had only Genesis 3:15, all we could do is scratch our heads and wonder what God is saying. Looking back from the progression of revelation through the rest of Scripture, though, we can see that at the precise moment of sin's entrance into the world, God began unfolding his plan of redemption as big as a canvas covering the sky.

The picture revealed as this canvas unfolds takes our breath away. It is of a man on a cross who, in his dying, condemns humanity's tormentor and, in his resurrection, secures forever

<!-- page-143 -->

the victory God planned from the beginning. Jesus ultimately and finally defeats Satan. In the meantime, Eve's descendants—such as Abraham (Gen. 22:17–19; Gal. 3:16–17)³³ and David (2 Sam. 7:12–15),³⁴ with whom God initiated covenantal relationships—are the "seed" through whom God carries out his Satan-crushing work. Ultimately, all those who believe in Jesus also participate in defeating Satan. As Paul said in Romans 16:20, "The God of peace will soon crush Satan under your feet."

### Grace Is the Basis of Covenant

To see this, we need to understand how God interacts with his people through covenant. This is a critically important concept, and most of the rest of this chapter will be confusing unless we grasp it clearly, so let's get started.

Throughout the story of Scripture, God makes agreements with his people. The word for these agreements is **covenant**. The English word *covenant* connotes a legal agreement between two parties that involves both rights and responsibilities.

> **Covenant:** an agreement between two parties that involves both rights and responsibilities.

A covenant is different from a contract. Although both involve a commitment between two parties, in a contract each party is *self-centered* ("What's in it for me? What are my rights? What can I demand?"). A contract focuses on the obligations of the other party, looking for specific, concrete results. "Do this or else!" If a contract is broken, the signers can seek recourse through courts of law. A professional football team, for instance, may choose to release a player after three years, but if it has agreed to pay the player for four years, it must, even if the player doesn't play.

A covenant, on the other hand, is *other-centered*. Take marriage. When two people marry, each makes a vow that clarifies what he or she will do, not what he or she expects the other to do: "I take you to be my wife (or husband), to have and to hold from this day forward, for better, for worse, for richer, for poorer, in sickness and in health, to love and to cherish, till death us do part, according to God's holy law, and this is my solemn vow." High expectations? You bet: marriage is for life. It generates love based on commitment, not just feelings.

The foundation of a marriage covenant is a common vision, not a bullet list of performance-oriented results. The question in a covenant is not "What specifically will you do?" but rather "Will I be faithful to you as a person?" Person, not to-do list; love, not obligation. If one spouse acts in an unloving fashion, he or she can remedy it by humbly asking for forgiveness and thus restoring the relationship.

When God made covenants with people, the typical covenantal structure was to list the authority of the one making the covenant, outline the terms of the covenant, and then announce the blessings and curses. There were clear consequences, good or bad, that those making the covenant would call down on themselves if they followed the covenant or refused to do so (Lev. 26; Deut. 28). The prophets were well aware of these blessings and curses, and they referenced them repeatedly. The ultimate covenantal curse was exile.

God has a covenantal relationship with his creation. Sometimes God's covenant partner is all of creation, sometimes it is a select group of people, and sometimes it is an

<!-- page-144 -->

individual and his future descendants (seed). Covenants provide the backbone of the Bible's metanarrative. Without understanding covenants, we will miss much of the way God works.

Here's a brief description of the major covenants in the Bible and how each one is ultimately secured by Jesus Christ himself.

**1. Creation covenant.** This covenant was made with Adam to establish an environment of *shalom* (wholeness) with those made in God's image. Jesus fulfills this covenant. The New Testament says that Jesus was the ultimate image of God (Col. 1:15),³⁵ the Second Adam (1 Cor. 15:45),³⁶ and the "Seed" of the woman who ultimately crushes Satan (Rev. 21–22).

**2. Noahic covenant.** This covenant, made with Noah in Genesis 9, describes how Noah and his family were rescued from judgment and tasked to preserve creation. The sign of the covenant was the rainbow. Jesus ultimately fulfilled this covenant by ushering in the new creation (Gal. 6:12–16, 2 Cor. 5:17).³⁷

**3. Abrahamic covenant.** This covenant, made with Abraham, established a new nation that would be a blessing to all the other nations (Gen. 12). The sign of the covenant was the circumcision of Abraham. The apostle Paul talked about Jesus's fulfilling this covenant: all who are in Christ are the "seed" of Abraham (Gal. 3:29).³⁸

**4. Mosaic (or Sinaitic) covenant.** Through Moses, God made a covenant with the people of Israel, setting them apart, giving them the mission to reach the world (Exod. 6:1–8, Exod. 19). The sign of the covenant was the Sabbath (Exod. 31:13).³⁹ Jesus fulfilled this covenant as the Son of God, the true Israel,⁴⁰ the true tabernacle (Heb. 9:1–15), and the ultimate sacrifice (Phil. 2:1–11, Heb. 10:11–13).⁴¹

**5. Davidic covenant.** God's covenant with David was the promise of an eternal dynasty (2 Sam. 7:8–13). Jesus fulfilled this covenant by being the "Son of David" (Matt. 1:1)⁴² and the eternal king (1 Tim. 1:17–20).⁴³

**6. New covenant.** God established a new covenant with Israel (Jer. 31), promising a new heart and *shalom* and forgiveness for their sins. The sign of this covenant would be the circumcision of the heart (Jer. 4:4)⁴⁴ and baptism (Col. 2:8–15). Jesus fulfilled this covenant by inaugurating all these things, which began in him (Heb. 10:11–14).⁴⁵

Here is one highly important point to keep in mind. The English word *covenant* suggests an agreement between two consenting people. The biblical covenants, however, are one-sided. In each case, God chooses his covenant partner and sets out the expectations without human input. In this sense, "covenant" is similar to the notion of "vow" or "promise." God's covenants both *declare* promises of God's commitment and express *expectations* of human faithfulness. Of course, only Jesus was perfectly faithful to each covenant's conditions. Thus, he is the ultimate fulfillment of each covenant.

<!-- page-145 -->

## 4. Act 3a: Redemption Initiated

God's plan to redeem the world includes his election of one nation, Israel. We know this because of God's covenants with Abraham (Gen. 12; 15; 17) and Israel (Exod. 19; Deut. 4).

### The Abrahamic Covenant

The Abrahamic covenant begins in Genesis 12:1–3⁴⁶ but is expanded on in later chapters. God chose Abraham to be the conduit of his blessings to humankind. Contrary to what one might expect in an ancient Near East culture (in which the firstborn had all the rights), God never seemed to act according to expectations. Of Abraham's sons he chose Isaac, not Ishmael. Of Isaac's sons he chose Jacob, not Esau. Even among Jacob's twelve sons, only two (Judah and Joseph) were selected for special ministries.

> **God chose Abraham to be the conduit of his blessings to humankind. Contrary to what one might expect in an ancient Near East culture (in which the firstborn had all the rights), God never seemed to act according to expectations.**

In any event, God chose Abraham and made five promises to him that draw a contrast between how God dealt with Adam, Eve, and their descendants and how he dealt with Abraham and his descendants:

- **Relationship.** Whereas Adam and Eve had experienced the curse of constant battle with Satan (Gen. 3:15),⁴⁷ God established a covenant to protect Abraham and his descendants.
- **Nationhood.** Whereas Adam and Eve had been evicted from the garden of Eden (Gen. 3:23),⁴⁸ God told Abraham that his descendants would form into a great nation.
- **Seed.** Whereas God had told Eve that childbirth would be painful and that her descendants would be attacked by Satan (Gen. 3:15–16),⁴⁹ God promised Abraham that his descendants would be as numerous as the stars in heaven and the sand on the seashore.⁵⁰
- **Land.** Whereas Cain was cursed to be a wanderer and fugitive (Gen. 4:12),⁵¹ God promised to escort Abraham to a land where he could settle down and prosper (Gen. 12:1).⁵²
- **Blessing to Others.** Whereas Canaan was cursed to be a slave to the nations (Gen. 9:25),⁵³ God promised Abraham that his descendants would be a blessing to all the families of the earth (Gen. 12:3).⁵⁴

Through one man, God would reach the nations. This is a common characteristic of how God operates. When he wants to do something *really big* (such as spread his blessing to the world), he starts *really small* (with a nomadic sheepherder rather than a prominent king). In response, Abraham and his descendants were to have faith (Gen. 15:6),⁵⁵ obey God's call and

<!-- page-146 -->

command (Gen. 12:1–4; 22:1),⁵⁶ enter into God's presence (Gen. 17:1), lead blameless lives (Gen. 17:1),⁵⁷ and be circumcised (Gen. 17:9–14, 22–27). Using royal imagery, the author makes it clear that Abraham's descendants would be missionaries to the world, spreading the word of God's covenant promises.⁵⁸

> **God's covenant with Abraham is so important throughout Scripture that we cannot understand the flow of Scripture unless we grasp how central this aspect of God's revelation is.**

In the New Testament, Matthew saw the connection. Jesus was the "seed" of Abraham (Matt. 1:1).⁵⁹ The apostle Paul saw it too (Gal. 3). Paul even called Abraham the paragon of faith (Rom. 4:1–20). God's covenant with Abraham is so important throughout Scripture that we cannot understand the flow of Scripture unless we grasp how central this aspect of God's revelation is.

### The Mosaic Covenant

The most significant historical and theological event in Israel's history is the exodus of the children of Israel from Egypt (Exod. 1–15). The Bible connects the exodus to the Abrahamic covenant (Exod. 2:24; 6:4–8),⁶⁰ showing that the covenant God made with Moses at Mount Sinai is a continuation of the covenant he made with Abraham some six hundred years earlier.

Through Moses, God made a covenant with the children of Israel. Contrary to what many people think, the Mosaic covenant was not a way for the children of Israel to earn righteousness through good works. In making the covenant, God reminded them that he is the one who brought them to himself (Exod. 19:4; 20:2).⁶¹ Obedience to the law is a *response* to God's grace; the exodus is the image of salvation. The children of Israel understood this clearly and sang a victory hymn: "I will sing to the LORD, for he has triumphed gloriously; the horse and his rider he has thrown into the sea. The LORD is my strength and my song, and he has become my salvation" (Exod. 15:1–2).

The exodus is so central in the biblical narrative that trying to understand *anything* in Scripture without grasping its significance is like trying to understand, without reference to bees, how honey is made. The exodus appears throughout the Old Testament as what film story consultant Bobette Buster calls a "gleaming detail"—a motif that appears repeatedly and orients viewers to the film's central message.⁶² The exodus is everywhere in the Old Testament: in the historical narrative,⁶³ the psalms,⁶⁴ and the prophets.⁶⁵ Many of these passages refer to the future restoration of the nation in terms of a "new exodus."

The exodus shows up in the New Testament as well, such as in 2 Corinthians 6:16, when the apostle Paul applies God's promise to the church: "I will make my dwelling among them and walk among them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people."⁶⁶

## 5. Act 3b: Redemption Complicated

The bulk of the Old Testament shows God's sustained faithfulness to Israel, despite Israel's unfaithfulness to him. This tension is seen in the historical narrative, in the wisdom literature, and especially in the writings of the prophets.⁶⁷

<!-- page-147 -->

### The Davidic Covenant

In the Davidic covenant (2 Sam. 7), God promised an eternal dynasty to David and his seed. The Abrahamic covenant included promises of royalty (Gen. 17:6; 49:10).⁶⁸ Judah, David's tribe, was prominent from Israel's early days. The historical books discussed the need for a king (Judg. 21:25).⁶⁹

Clearly, the prophet Samuel saw the connection and focused on identifying David's line through the amazing and providential story of David's great-grandmother Ruth, through Samuel's mother's (Hannah's) prayer for the birth of Samuel (who would eventually anoint David king), and through the foreshadowing events displaying Saul's badness and David's goodness (1 Sam. 9–15). All of these point to David's reign as something extraordinary. But most extraordinary is that Jesus comes from David's line. David's psalms focus strongly on the *idea* of God's anointed one. Another word for "anointed one" is *messiah*.

> **Most extraordinary is that Jesus comes from David's line. David's psalms focus strongly on the *idea* of God's anointed one. Another word for "anointed one" is *messiah*.**

Israel had a wrong desire for a king (1 Sam. 8; 12), yet God was faithful. Saul was an utter failure as Israel's first king, yet God was faithful. David was a disappointment as well; his life was marked by sin and failure, yet God was faithful. Solomon began as a wise king but ultimately caused the kingdom to divide (1 Kings 11:11)⁷⁰ as he became the antithesis of the godly idea of kingship. He developed a private army, took many wives, taxed people heavily to accumulate wealth for himself, and considered himself to be better than the people he ruled (each of these was specifically prohibited in Deuteronomy 17:14–20). And yet God was faithful.

After Solomon's death, the kingdom split. As 1 Kings 12 to 2 Kings 25 records, the northern kingdom had a terrible track record: twenty bad kings and no good ones. The southern kingdom was hardly better; only eight of its twenty kings were good.

And yet God was faithful.⁷¹

## 6. Act 3c: Redemption Predicted

In most movies, a point comes when things can't get any worse. And then things get worse. The Old Testament period ends this way: with frustration, uncertainty, and a four-hundred-year silence. In this part of Act 3, when people think God has abandoned them, prophets arise to urge the people to return to faithfulness to God. Typically, God raised up prophets when leaders, the kings and priests, failed to do their jobs or when they led the people into unfaithfulness.

> **What do prophets do? Mainly their job is to call people back to faithfulness to God's law and God's mission.**

So what do prophets do? Mainly their job is to call people back to faithfulness to God's law and God's mission. Some of what they say involves predictions for the future, but essentially they are to highlight God's covenantal promises: if the people will repent of their wicked ways, God will forgive them.

<!-- page-148 -->

Two categories of sin concern the prophets most: idolatry and social injustice. Idolatry, attempting to replace the one true God, is the focus of the first half of the Ten Commandments. These **vertical commands**, emphasizing people's relationship with God, include having no other gods, not making idols, not taking the Lord's name in vain, and so forth. The second half of the Ten Commandments, the **horizontal commands**, emphasizing people's relationship with each other, provide justice by prohibiting such things as bearing false witness, committing adultery, stealing, and killing. This is why Jesus summed up the law as loving God with all of our hearts, souls, minds, and strength and loving our neighbors as ourselves.

> **Vertical Commands:** commandments relating to humanity's relationship with God.

> **Horizontal Commands:** commandments relating to humanity's social relationships.

The prophets' denunciations of idolatry and injustice boil down to this: you have turned away from bearing God's image; you must turn back or, just as surely as thunder follows lightning, you will experience the consequences. The prophets' message was essentially a divorce decree; because of the people's unfaithfulness, God was sending them into exile.⁷²

The prophets realized, though, that exile is not the last word. After exile comes restoration (Deut. 4:29–31;⁷³ 30:1–10). Although people might see prophets as preaching judgment, their ultimate message is salvation. Take a look at this much-quoted (and often misquoted) portion from Jeremiah:

> I know the plans I have for you, declares the LORD, plans for welfare and not for evil, to give you a future and a hope. Then you will call upon me and come and pray to me, and I will hear you. You will seek and find me, when you seek me with all your heart. I will be found by you, declares the LORD, and I will restore your fortunes and gather you from all the nations and all the places where I have driven you, declares the LORD, and I will bring you back to the place from which I sent you into exile. (29:11–14)

The prophetic writings—which feature powerful promises of material blessing, defeat of enemies, restoration of reputation, and a willingness and desire to obey God—show a God who restores broken people.⁷⁴ Here we also find promises of a coming messiah. The prophecies promise the following:

- the coming king (Zech. 9:9–13; 12:10–14)⁷⁵
- the day of the Lord and his appearing (Zech. 9:14–17; 12:1–9; 14:1–21; Mal. 4:1–3)⁷⁶
- the restoration of Judah and Israel (Zech. 10)
- the coming of the Lord's messenger (Mal. 3:1–4)⁷⁷
- the coming of Elijah (Mal. 4:5–6)⁷⁸

<!-- page-149 -->

The book of Psalms is also a rich source of prophecy. Most psalms are written from David's point of view, describing his experiences and emotions. David's dynasty was secured through all time by direct promise from God. The so-called royal psalms (e.g., Psalms 2, 18, 20, 21, 45, 72, 101, 110, 132, 144) cause us to think of the coming Son of David through whom God will restore everything completely.⁷⁹

We can imagine these promises sounding fantastical to their original hearers. *Have these prophets lost their minds? Why are they so focused on the distant future? We need help now!* To some extent, though, the people took the prophets at their word. Persia's defeat of Babylon (539 BC) allowed exiled Jews to return home. The returning exiles must have been filled with hope. The prophets' words were coming true: a glorious restoration was at hand! But as the books of Ezra, Nehemiah, Esther, Haggai, Zechariah, and Malachi show, the actual experience of the returning exiles failed to reach the rhetorical heights seemingly promised by the prophets' writings. The people avoided wholesale idolatry but were instead plagued by apathy, self-interest, infighting, divorce, and failure to follow the Mosaic law.⁸⁰ Plus, the exiles never regained political independence, so David's dynasty was never reestablished. No wonder people doubted God's promises.

At this time of uncertainty and doubt, the call was dropped, so to speak. For four hundred years, the people heard nothing from God.

> **Intertestamental Period:** the four-hundred-year period between the completion of the Old Testament and the writing of the New Testament.

### Intertestamental Silence

After the writings of the prophets, the Old Testament ends. The four-hundred-year silence theologians call the **intertestamental period** was, outside of Palestine, anything but silent. Revelation from God to Israel had ceased, but the world was on the move. Geopolitically, Greece under Alexander the Great conquered Persia (around 333 BC) to become the new world empire, and then in the first-century BC, Rome took over.

Through a movement to universalize Greek culture, called **Hellenization** (from the Greek word *ellinismos*, which refers to the Greek language and values), the Jews were pressured to change their language, dress, and other basic ways of living, and they splintered into factions over how to respond to these pressures. **Zealots** wanted to overthrow foreign rulers. **Sadducees** wanted to accommodate them.

> **Hellenization:** the spread of Greek culture (language, arts, ideas, religion, government) throughout the conquered ancient world.

> **Zealots:** a first-century Jewish faction that militantly opposed the Roman occupation of Palestine.

> **Sadducees:** a first-century Jewish faction of priests and aristocrats who expressed complacency toward the Roman occupation, denied the concept of an afterlife, rejected the Talmud, and believed that only the first five books of the Torah were authoritative.

<!-- page-150 -->

**Essenes** wanted to separate themselves by moving into the wilderness. **Pharisees** thought an obsessive attention to God's law would bring the messiah. Whatever theological differences existed, each group hoped to be seen as the "remnant" referred to in Isaiah 10 and 11—the devoted believers who would hold on despite the circumstances. This caused more infighting and tension, as you can imagine. Who would be called unfaithful, and who was the "true Israel"?

> **Essenes:** a first-century Jewish faction that lived a monastic and communal life in the desert, shared everything in common, practiced ritual cleansing, and produced the oldest known copies of the Old Testament (for instance, the Dead Sea Scrolls).

> **Pharisees:** a first-century Jewish faction that practiced a legalistic interpretation of the Torah, accepted the Talmud as authoritative, believed in the concept of an afterlife, and opposed the Roman occupation of Palestine.

God's silence was, in reality, the dark before the dawn. When the dawn arrived, it revealed something so stunning that the theological elite couldn't fathom it. As songwriter Michael Card writes, "For a thousand years the dreamers dreamt, and hoped to see his love. But the Promise showed their wildest dreams had simply not been wild enough."⁸¹ What the dawning light revealed is the subject of the New Testament narrative. Let's look at it through the redemptive ministry of Jesus (Act 4), the redemptive ministry of the church (Act 5), and consummation of God's plan at the end of time.

## 7. Act 4: Kingdom Restored, Redemption Accomplished

The prophets envisioned a messiah who would drive death and humiliation further and further from the field of battle until they disappeared altogether. In fact, the very last statement of the Old Testament, Malachi 4:5–6, says, "Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet before the great and awesome day of the LORD comes. And he will turn the hearts of fathers to their children and the hearts of children to their fathers, lest I come and strike the land with a decree of utter destruction."

After a four-hundred-year downbeat, the orchestral sounds of redemption arose as though the prolonged silence were an intentional part of the musical score. According to Luke 1:17,⁸² John the Baptist was the one prophesied about in Malachi—the one who would come in the wild spirit of Elijah to prepare the way of the Lord. And as John the Baptist testified, the "Lord" was Jesus Christ, sent to earth to "re" everything: to renew, to restore, to redeem, to reconcile.⁸³

These "re" words belong today to our theological vocabulary because the music never really stopped, and God, the composer and conductor, never left the podium. Rather, he weaved pain, confusion, and doubt into the music so that with the resounding redemption, he might express the harmony of creation more profoundly than creation itself could have. We can see this in three major themes reflected in the gospel accounts of Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John.

<!-- page-151 -->

### *First Theme: Gospel*

Jesus came to proclaim and become God's gospel (good news). From the beginning, we see that Jesus Christ was the recipient of both the Abrahamic and Davidic covenants, he was of a kingly dynasty, he would save people, his coming was the fulfillment of prophecy, and he was bringing God's kingdom.

So what is the gospel? The letters of the apostle Paul clarify the term, so we'll get a clearer sense of it in Act 5. For now, though, the gospel accounts make clear that the "the gospel of Jesus Christ" (Mark 1:1) is part of a larger story line called "the gospel of God" (Mark 1:14). For example:

### **Matthew**

The book of the genealogy of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the son of Abraham … (1:1)

You shall call his name Jesus, for he will save his people from their sins. (1:21)

All this took place to fulfill what the Lord had spoken by the prophet. (1:22)

[John the Baptist said,] "Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand." (3:2)

### **Mark**

The beginning of the gospel of Jesus Christ, the Son of God. As it is written in Isaiah the prophet …" (1:1–2)

Now after John was arrested, Jesus came into Galilee, proclaiming the gospel of God, and saying, "The time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is at hand; repent and believe in the gospel." (1:14–15)

### **Luke**

[In the synagogue, Jesus] unrolled the scroll and found the place where it was written, "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to proclaim good news to the poor. He has sent me to proclaim liberty to the captives and recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty those who are oppressed, to proclaim the year of the Lord's favor." (4:17–19)

Today this Scripture has been fulfilled in your hearing. (4:21)

I must preach the good news of the kingdom of God to the other towns as well; for I was sent for this purpose. (4:43)

<!-- page-152 -->

### **John**

The Word became flesh and dwelt among us, and we have seen his glory, glory as of the only Son from the Father, full of grace and truth. (1:14)

The law was given through Moses; grace and truth came through Jesus Christ. (1:17)

Behold, the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world! (1:29)

I have seen and have borne witness that this is the Son of God. (1:34)

The gospel writers were unified: Jesus is the Messiah. But there is a second theme as well: Jesus is the *prophesied* Messiah.

### *Second Theme: Prophetic Fulfillment*

The Gospels connect the dots between the Old Testament and Jesus.⁸⁴ Very often, Jesus is said to "fulfill" something from the prophets. For example, five different prophetic fulfillments are mentioned in just the first two chapters of Matthew alone:

- Jesus's virgin birth (Matt. 1:23 / Isa. 7:14)⁸⁵
- Bethlehem as the birthplace of the Messiah (Matt. 2:6 / Mic. 5:2)⁸⁶
- Jesus's return from Egypt (Matt. 2:15 / Hosea 11:1)⁸⁷
- Herod's killing of children (Matt. 2:18 / Jer. 31:15)⁸⁸
- Jesus's home of Nazareth (Matt. 2:23 / [no clear OT text])⁸⁹

When we turn back and look at the specific Old Testament passages, however, we may become confused. Many of these prophecies were clearly in reference to a localized event occurring at the time of the writing. Only one prophecy, that from Micah 5:2, is a simple prediction-fulfillment passage. Isaiah 7:14 should probably be read as having a double fulfillment: one in Isaiah's day and then Jesus's. The other three Old Testament passages aren't predictions at all, strictly speaking. Clearly, if we are to take the biblical text at its word, we need to have a larger notion of "fulfill" than anything akin to a sportscaster predicting the win of a sports team.

> **Clearly, if we are to take the biblical text at its word, we need to have a larger notion of "fulfill" than anything akin to a sportscaster predicting the win of a sports team.**

If we began with the assumption, however, that prophecy is straightforward, that each prediction comes with a onetime fulfillment, then we would miss seeing how Jesus's fulfillment of prophecy is part of the deep

<!-- page-153 -->

structure of the Gospels. For example, Matthew intentionally talks of Jesus in a way that shows a clear parallel to the journey of Israel itself.

| Israel's Journey | Jesus's Journey |
|------------------|-----------------|
| *Prehistory—Abraham* | *Genealogy—Abraham, David, Exile* |
| *"Birth" in Egypt* | *Birth* |
| *Plagues* | *Flight to Egypt Death of Firstborn* |
| *Exodus* | *Baptism* |
| *Mount Sinai* | *Wilderness Temptation* |
| *Wilderness* | *Sermon on Mount* |
| *Kingdom in Land* | *Kingdom Ministry* |
| *Exile* | *Death* |
| *Restoration* | *Resurrection* |

The one sense in which Jesus does *not* equal Israel is that where Israel failed, Jesus succeeded. The Old Testament is filled with tension and confusion to which Jesus brings clarity and resolution. At the moment of despair, Jesus brings hope. The Old Testament raises questions. In Christ, we have answers.

### *Third Theme: The Kingdom of God*

The kingdom of God (or kingdom of heaven) blankets the pages of the New Testament. Taken together, the references to the kingdom of God are not about a *place* but about a *reality*: God is king. This has always been true, of course, but the New Testament shows how the reality of God-as-king over time, space, and history—just as the Old Testament writers anticipated—should affect everything we do. We rejoice in the kingdom of God, anticipating and participating in the removal of everything that plagues us presently: sin, sickness, death, and unfaithfulness. We become vessels of the kingdom by becoming vessels of the Spirit.

> **Taken together, the references to the kingdom of God are not about a *place* but about a *reality*: God is king. This has always been true, of course, but the New Testament shows how the reality of God-as-king over time, space, and history—just as the Old Testament writers anticipated—should affect everything we do.**

But the way in which the New Testament fulfills the Old Testament did not always align with Jewish expectations. For example, Jews expected a *messiah*, but they did not anticipate the *Messiah*, one person who would be both the human messiah and God. This is the culmination of the biblical narrative: God appeared in human flesh as the savior of the world. One person. One reality.

<!-- page-154 -->

There are many theories about how the transition from the "kingdom-established" to the "kingdom-realized" will take place, but all agree that it is a two-stage process. The first stage was Jesus's incarnation, death, resurrection, and ascension and the advent of the new covenant. The second stage is known as Jesus's second coming. The return of Christ will lead to the full consummation of the kingdom of God. The kingdom is both *already* and *not yet*.

## 8. Act 5: Kingdom Displayed, Redemption Applied: The Church

As we have seen, the word *gospel* literally means "good news." But good news about what? First, the gospel found in the Scriptures is the good news of Jesus's life and work. Any gospel that does not focus on Jesus as Lord and Messiah and does not proclaim his death and resurrection is not the gospel of God. Second, the gospel of God is the *announcement* that God's kingdom is "at hand" (Matt. 4:17)⁹⁰ to bring blessing to the nations of the earth (Gal. 3:6–9).⁹¹

> ***Gospel:*** **from the Old English for "good news"; the message of Jesus's saving work and God's present kingdom.**

The word *gospel* was certainly not new to New Testament times. Isaiah 40–66 is a major part of the biblical background for the gospel. The **Septuagint** (one of the major original sources from which the Bible is translated) uses the Greek root for "gospel" as the word for heralding good news (Isa. 41:27; 52:7; 60:6; 61:1).⁹² What good news? That God will rescue his covenant people from exile, demonstrating that he is their King and the one and only Lord over creation.

> ***Septuagint:*** **the Greek translation of the Hebrew Scriptures.**

Those of Jewish faith were not the only ones to talk about spreading the gospel. The Roman emperors of the first century used the word *gospel* to describe official reports that made them happy, such as military victories or the birth of an heir. In fact, the emperor was known as "Lord." Rome even had certain heralds who were to spread the good news about its successes. Undoubtedly, when the apostles announced the gospel and that Jesus is Lord, it would have been understood as a political statement about the king.

The apostle Paul, Jewish by birth and until his miraculous conversion a persecutor of Christians, is the biblical author who most prolifically articulates the message of the gospel. Paul's apostolic gospel has received much attention from biblical scholars, many of whom believe that Paul's gospel was different from Jesus's. But as theologian N. T. Wright has taken pains to show, Paul understood the gospel in light of his Jewish upbringing—indeed in light of all of Jewish history—and was faithful to spread the gospel of Jesus, not his own.⁹³

### What Is the Church?

The apostle Paul wrote most of his letters to entire churches—churches formed through the spread of the good news about Jesus. The book of Acts records how the church, the *ecclesia*, was a community united by God's Spirit and charged with proclaiming the reality of Christ's kingdom to the whole world. This community, based on the new covenant, was made up of both Jews and non-Jews (Gentiles). It defied all the old categories about who was the true Israel and which sect was best serving God's will.

<!-- page-155 -->

In fact, the church created an entirely new identity. The new covenant articulated by Jesus, through which people could become a "new creation" (2 Cor. 5:17),⁹⁴ was unprecedented in the world. So how would people who joined this new church describe it? The New Testament uses many metaphors with which people are familiar. The church is described as a bride, army, nation, body, family, team, temple, flock, and hospital.

Many of the metaphors describing the church come from Old Testament descriptions of Israel. The apostle Peter, a constant companion of Jesus, gave one of the clearest statements about the church's mission in light of Israel's history:

> You are a chosen race, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a people for his own possession, that you may proclaim the excellencies of him who called you out of darkness into his marvelous light. Once you were not a people, but now you are God's people; once you had not received mercy, but now you have received mercy. (1 Pet. 2:9–10)

Very simply, the church would spread the good news about God, just as Israel had been instructed to do.

### What Place Do We Have in the Metanarrative?

Earlier in this chapter, I hinted that Christians have a place in the biblical metanarrative today. The "filming" is still taking place; we are actors on the set as the story resolves. True, Scripture is no longer being written, and we don't have apostles who carry the full weight of God's authority. However, Scripture does include future believers in its narrative, and we do have a place in the story of God.

Earlier I quoted Erich Fromm and Wendell Watters, both of whom see Christians as brainwashed and tormented by sin. Now we can see that their account is precisely the opposite of the truth. Because of redemption, Christians can see themselves as image bearers of God with great worth and potential but suffering from sin's parasitical infestation. Redemption through Christ frees us from confusion and guilt. It is no wonder, then, that Christians (and even people of other religions) are more likely than those without religious belief to be mentally healthy.⁹⁵

Although the New Testament certainly provides detailed instructions for the church that translate to today, it isn't primarily a "church manual"; rather, the story itself guides us. The rich metaphors used about the church in the New Testament help us see our connection to the earliest followers of God, even as far back as the garden of Eden. And we will also soon glimpse our future. These big-picture realities ought to guide us as we make corporate and personal decisions about our identity and mission, particularly regarding issues that the Bible does not address in a simple chapter-and-verse citation.

## 9. Act 6: Kingdom Consummated, Redemption Completed: New Creation

Many Christians have the impression that their eternal destiny is "up there" somewhere. According to Revelation 21–22, however, we do not go to God at the end of all things; rather, God comes to us, "tabernacling" among us. The experience of his presence

<!-- page-156 -->

will be even better than Adam and Eve's in the original creation because sin will have been conquered once and for all. Everyone—even God's enemies—will at that time realize that a world that was created, fallen, and redeemed is a greater testament to God's glory than creation itself.

We cannot fully comprehend the description of the new creation pictured in the book of Revelation. There will be no sun and no sea, for example, and no sin. But what we can comprehend is very exciting: we won't just be floating around on clouds, playing harps. We'll be able to watch God at work—and we'll work alongside him—making all things new.

Bible professor and pastor W. Gary Phillips has shared an exciting insight about the unity of the Bible by showing remarkable parallels between the first three chapters of the Bible and the last three.⁹⁶

| Genesis 1–3 | Revelation 20–22 |
|-------------|------------------|
| "In the beginning, God created the heavens and the earth" (1:1) | "I saw a new heaven and a new earth" (21:1) |
| "The darkness he called Night" (1:5) | "There will be no night there" (21:25) |
| "God made the two great lights" (sun and moon, 1:16) | "The city has no need of sun or moon" (21:23) |
| "In the day that you eat from it you shall surely die" (2:17) | "Death shall be no more, neither shall there be mourning" (21:4) |
| Satan appears as deceiver of mankind (3:1) | Satan disappears forever (20:10) |
| Shown a garden, into which defilement entered (3:6–7) | Shown a city, nothing that defiles shall ever enter it (21:27) |
| Walk of God with man interrupted (3:8–10) | Walk of God with man resumed (21:3) |
| Initial triumph of the serpent (3:13) | Ultimate triumph of the Lamb (20:10; 22:3) |
| "I will surely multiply your pain" (3:16) | There shall be no more pain (21:4) |
| "Cursed is the ground because of you" (3:17) | There shall be no more curse (22:3) |
| Man's dominion broken in the fall of the first man, Adam (3:19) | Man's dominion restored in the rule of the new man, Christ (22:5) |
| First paradise closed (3:23) | New paradise opened (21:25) |
| Access to the tree of life disinherited in Adam (3:24) | Access to the tree of life reinstated in Christ (22:14) |
| They were driven from God's presence (3:24) | They shall see his face (22:4) |

<!-- page-157 -->

Christ will renew all things. There will be a great reversal of sin, suffering, and brokenness. The Bible offers a complete story, from the beginning of time to the end, from the original creation to the new creation, from age to age—a testimony to God's faithfulness.

> **The Bible offers a complete story, from the beginning of time to the end, from the original creation to the new creation, from age to age—a testimony to God's faithfulness.**

## 10. Conclusion

So how do we live in the meantime? Jesus's sacrifice is *already* complete, but we are *not yet* home with him. Our bodies are like a tent: they're temporary. But God clothes us in his glory and gives us his Spirit to enable us to live as redeemed people now, not just when we get to heaven. So what does this life look like? Here's how Paul puts it:

> We are always of good courage. We know that while we are at home in the body we are away from the Lord, for we walk by faith, not by sight. Yes, we are of good courage, and we would rather be away from the body and at home with the Lord. So whether we are at home or away, we make it our aim to please him. For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, so that each one may receive what is due for what he has done in the body, whether good or evil. Therefore, knowing the fear of the Lord, we persuade others. (2 Cor. 5:6–11)

This is what the redeemed life looks like. We know we're not home yet, but in God's power we live courageously, seeking to please him, walking by faith, and persuading others that his story is the story of the whole world—the true story of the world and everyone in it.

## Endnotes

1. Gilbert Keith Chesterton, *Orthodoxy* (New York: John Lane Company, 1909), 24.
2. Quoted in Ravi Zacharias, "Existential Challenges of Evil and Suffering," in *Beyond Opinion: Living the Faith We Defend*, ed. Ravi Zacharias (Nashville: Thomas Nelson, 2007), 206.
3. Cornelius Plantinga Jr., in one of the best resources on sin and the fall, *Not the Way It's Supposed to Be: A Breviary of Sin* (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 1995).
4. Genesis 2:25: "The man and his wife were both naked and were not ashamed."
5. John C. Holbert, "Back to the Beginning as Lent Begins: Reflections on Genesis 2:15–17; 3:1–7," Patheos, March 4, 2011, www.patheos.com//Resources/Additional-Resources/Back-to-the-Beginning-as-Lent-Begins-John-Holbert-03-07-2011.html.
6. The apostle Paul said in Romans 5:12: "Sin came into the world through one man," implying that the man was the first to sin, even though he was not the first to eat of the forbidden fruit. Perhaps his misleading of the woman was that sin.
7. Genesis 3:1: "Now the serpent was more crafty than any other beast of the field that the LORD God had made. He said to the woman, 'Did God actually say, "You shall not eat of any tree in the garden"?'"
8. Genesis 3:14: "The LORD God said to the serpent, 'Because you have done this, cursed are you above all livestock and above all beasts of the field; on your belly you shall go, and dust you shall eat all the days of your life.'"
9. Genesis 3:15: "I will put enmity between you and the woman, and between your offspring and her offspring; he shall bruise your head, and you shall bruise his heel."
10. Revelation 12:9: "The great dragon was thrown down, that ancient serpent, who is called the devil and Satan, the deceiver of the whole world—he was thrown down to the earth, and his angels were thrown down with him"; Revelation 20:2: "He seized the dragon, that ancient serpent, who is the devil and Satan, and bound him for a thousand years"; Romans 16:20: "The God of peace will soon crush Satan under your feet. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you."
11. Genesis 3:22: "Then the LORD God said, 'Behold, the man has become like one of us in knowing good and evil. Now, lest

<!-- page-158 -->

he reach out his hand and take also of the tree of life and eat, and live forever.'"
12. Genesis 3:16: "To the woman he said, 'I will surely multiply your pain in childbearing; in pain you shall bring forth children. Your desire shall be for your husband, and he shall rule over you.'"
13. Scholars disagree about the meaning of the words *desire* and *rule* and thus whether Genesis 3:15b is a positive or negative statement. The negative seems more likely because of its immediate context (that is, among other curses) and the parallel of desire and rule in an obvious negative context in other places such as Genesis 4:7b ("[Sin's] desire is for you [Cain], but you must rule over it.").
14. Genesis 3:17–19: "To Adam he said, 'Because you have listened to the voice of your wife and have eaten of the tree of which I commanded you, "You shall not eat of it," cursed is the ground because of you; in pain you shall eat of it all the days of your life; thorns and thistles it shall bring forth for you; and you shall eat the plants of the field. By the sweat of your face you shall eat bread, till you return to the ground, for out of it you were taken; for you are dust, and to dust you shall return.'"
15. Genesis 4:8: "Cain spoke to Abel his brother. And when they were in the field, Cain rose up against his brother Abel and killed him."
16. Genesis 4:23–26: "Lamech said to his wives: 'Adah and Zillah, hear my voice; you wives of Lamech, listen to what I say: I have killed a man for wounding me, a young man for striking me. If Cain's revenge is sevenfold, then Lamech's is seventy-sevenfold.' And Adam knew his wife again, and she bore a son and called his name Seth, for she said, 'God has appointed for me another offspring instead of Abel, for Cain killed him.' To Seth also a son was born, and he called his name Enosh. At that time people began to call upon the name of the LORD." See Cornelius Plantinga Jr.'s discussion of this in *Not the Way It's Supposed to Be: A Breviary of Sin* (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 1995), chap. 9.
17. Genesis 6:5: "The LORD saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth, and that every intention of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually."
18. *Monty Python and the Holy Grail*, directed by Terry Gilliam and Terry Jones (1975; Culver City, CA: Sony Pictures Home Entertainment, 2006), DVD.
19. Erich Fromm, *You Shall Be as Gods: A Radical Interpretation of the Old Testament and Its Tradition* (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1966), 7.
20. Wendell W. Watters, "Christianity and Mental Health," *The Humanist* (Nov./Dec., 1987): 32.
21. Watters, "Christianity and Mental Health," 10.
22. Abraham Maslow, *Humanistic Psychology*, eds. I. David Welch, George A. Tate, and Fred Richards (Buffalo, NY: Prometheus Books, 1978), 11.
23. Paul Kurtz et al., "Credo," *The Humanist* (July/Aug. 1968): 18.
24. Carl Rogers, "Notes on Rollo May," *Journal of Humanistic Psychology* (Summer, 1982): 8.
25. In making his point about psychological guilt, Christian theologian Francis Schaeffer admitted that "psychological guilt is actual and cruel" but that the Christian view is more textured than the secular one because "Christians know that there is also real guilt, moral guilt before a holy God." Francis Schaeffer, *The Complete Works of Francis A. Schaeffer: A Christian Worldview*, 5 vols. (Westchester, IL: Crossway, 1982), 3:322. Schaeffer goes on to say, "When a man is broken in these [moral and psychological] areas, he is confused, because he has the feelings of real guilt within himself, and yet he is told by modern thinkers that these are only guilt 'feelings.' But he can never resolve these feelings, because … [he] has true moral awareness and the feeling of true guilt. You can tell him a million times that there is no true guilt, but he still knows there is true guilt."
26. This does not mean that Secularists have no conception of good and evil. But good and evil, from a secular viewpoint, need to be seen from the perspective of who humans have the potential to be, from what so-called "self-actualized" people (the most highly evolved) would think they are. As Abraham Maslow, the psychologist who coined the term self-actualization, admits, self-actualized people (those who are most highly evolved) have "notions of right and wrong and of good and evil [that] are often not the conventional ones." *Motivation and Personality*, 3rd ed., ed. Robert Frager et al. (London: Longman, 1987), 140–41.
27. Ellis G. Olim, *Humanistic Psychology*, eds. I. David Welch, George A. Tate, and Fred Richards (Buffalo, NY: Prometheus Books, 1978), 219.
28. Erich Fromm believed that "values are rooted in the very conditions of human existence; hence that our knowledge of these conditions—that is, of the 'human situation'—leads us to establishing values which have objective validity; this validity exists only with regard to the existence of man; outside of him there are no values." *Man for Himself: A Radical Interpretation of the Old Testament and Its Tradition* (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1964), 17.
29. We will discuss the idea that sin is a parasite in greater depth in chap. 8.
30. Genesis 4:25–26: "Adam knew his wife again, and she bore a son and called his name Seth, for she said, 'God has appointed for me another offspring instead of Abel, for Cain killed him.' To Seth also a son was born, and he called his name Enosh. At that time people began to call upon the name of the LORD."
31. Genesis 6:8: "Noah found favor in the eyes of the LORD."
32. This is how the Septuagint, the Greek translation of the Old Testament, interprets the Hebrew text. The Greek *sperma*, "seed," is not a collective noun, so its singular "he/his" is clearly interpretive.

<!-- page-159 -->

33. Genesis 22:17–19: "I will surely bless you, and I will surely multiply your offspring as the stars of heaven and as the sand that is on the seashore. And your offspring shall possess the gate of his enemies, and in your offspring shall all the nations of the earth be blessed, because you have obeyed my voice.' So Abraham returned to his young men, and they arose and went together to Beersheba. And Abraham lived at Beersheba"; Galatians 3:16–17: "Now the promises were made to Abraham and to his offspring. It does not say, 'And to offsprings,' referring to many, but referring to one, 'And to your offspring,' who is Christ. This is what I mean: the law, which came 430 years afterward, does not annul a covenant previously ratified by God, so as to make the promise void."
34. 2 Samuel 7:12–15: "When your days are fulfilled and you lie down with your fathers, I will raise up your offspring after you, who shall come from your body, and I will establish his kingdom. He shall build a house for my name, and I will establish the throne of his kingdom forever. I will be to him a father, and he shall be to me a son. When he commits iniquity, I will discipline him with the rod of men, with the stripes of the sons of men, but my steadfast love will not depart from him, as I took it from Saul, whom I put away from before you."
35. Colossians 1:15: "He is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of all creation."
36. 1 Corinthians 15:45: "Thus it is written, 'The first man Adam became a living being'; the last Adam became a life-giving spirit."
37. Galatians 6:12–16: "It is those who want to make a good showing in the flesh who would force you to be circumcised, and only in order that they may not be persecuted for the cross of Christ. For even those who are circumcised do not themselves keep the law, but they desire to have you circumcised that they may boast in your flesh. But far be it from me to boast except in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by which the world has been crucified to me, and I to the world. For neither circumcision counts for anything, nor uncircumcision, but a new creation. And as for all who walk by this rule, peace and mercy be upon them, and upon the Israel of God"; 2 Corinthians 5:17: "If anyone is in Christ, he is a new creation. The old has passed away; behold, the new has come."
38. Galatians 3:29: "If you are Christ's, then you are Abraham's offspring, heirs according to promise."
39. Exodus 31:13: "You are to speak to the people of Israel and say, 'Above all you shall keep my Sabbaths, for this is a sign between me and you throughout your generations, that you may know that I, the LORD, sanctify you.'"
40. We get a glimpse of this in Matthew 2:14, when Mary and Joseph flee from Herod to Egypt. Matthew says this happens to fulfill the words of the prophet: "Out of Egypt I called my son." This is a reference to Hosea 11:1, in which Israel is referred to as God's son. Now Jesus himself is referred to in this way, making him the true Israel.
41. Hebrews 10:11–13: "Every priest stands daily at his service, offering repeatedly the same sacrifices, which can never take away sins. But when Christ had offered for all time a single sacrifice for sins, he sat down at the right hand of God, waiting from that time until his enemies should be made a footstool for his feet."
42. Matthew 1:1: "The book of the genealogy of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the son of Abraham."
43. 1 Timothy 1:17–20: "To the King of the ages, immortal, invisible, the only God, be honor and glory forever and ever. Amen. This charge I entrust to you, Timothy, my child, in accordance with the prophecies previously made about you, that by them you may wage the good warfare, holding faith and a good conscience. By rejecting this, some have made shipwreck of their faith, among whom are Hymenaeus and Alexander, whom I have handed over to Satan that they may learn not to blaspheme."
44. Jeremiah 4:4: "Circumcise yourselves to the LORD; remove the foreskin of your hearts, O men of Judah and inhabitants of Jerusalem; lest my wrath go forth like fire, and burn with none to quench it, because of the evil of your deeds."
45. Hebrews 10:11–14: "Every priest stands daily at his service, offering repeatedly the same sacrifices, which can never take away sins. But when Christ had offered for all time a single sacrifice for sins, he sat down at the right hand of God, waiting from that time until his enemies should be made a footstool for his feet. For by a single offering he has perfected for all time those who are being sanctified."
46. Genesis 12:1–3: "The LORD said to Abram, 'Go from your country and your kindred and your father's house to the land that I will show you. And I will make of you a great nation, and I will bless you and make your name great, so that you will be a blessing. I will bless those who bless you, and him who dishonors you I will curse, and in you all the families of the earth shall be blessed.'"
47. Genesis 3:15: "I will put enmity between you and the woman, and between your offspring and her offspring; he shall bruise your head, and you shall bruise his heel."
48. Genesis 3:23: "The LORD God sent him out from the garden of Eden to work the ground from which he was taken."
49. Genesis 3:15–16: "I will put enmity between you and the woman, and between your offspring and her offspring; he shall bruise your head, and you shall bruise his heel.' To the woman he said, 'I will surely multiply your pain in childbearing; in pain you shall bring forth children. Your desire shall be for your husband, and he shall rule over you.'"
50. See Genesis 22:17a; cf. Genesis 15:5. In addition to the multitude of descendants, an individual "seed" is also hinted at. Genesis 22:17b says, "Your offspring [seed] shall possess the gate of his enemies." In other words, God was hinting to Abraham of a promise we now know to have been fulfilled in David and ultimately David's greater Son, Jesus.
51. Genesis 4:12: "When you work the ground, it shall no longer yield to you its strength. You shall be a fugitive and a wanderer on the earth."

<!-- page-160 -->

52. Genesis 12:1: "The LORD said to Abram, 'Go from your country and your kindred and your father's house to the land that I will show you.'"
53. Genesis 9:25: "He said, 'Cursed be Canaan; a servant of servants shall he be to his brothers.'"
54. Genesis 12:3: "I will bless those who bless you, and him who dishonors you I will curse, and in you all the families of the earth shall be blessed."
55. Genesis 15:6: "He believed the LORD, and he counted it to him as righteousness."
56. Genesis 12:1–4: "The LORD said to Abram, 'Go from your country and your kindred and your father's house to the land that I will show you. And I will make of you a great nation, and I will bless you and make your name great, so that you will be a blessing. I will bless those who bless you, and him who dishonors you I will curse, and in you all the families of the earth shall be blessed.' So Abram went, as the LORD had told him, and Lot went with him. Abram was seventy-five years old when he departed from Haran"; Genesis 22:1: "After these things God tested Abraham and said to him, 'Abraham!' And he said, 'Here I am.'"
57. Genesis 17:1: "When Abram was ninety-nine years old the LORD appeared to Abram and said to him, 'I am God Almighty; walk before me, and be blameless.'"
58. An older but still helpful resource on the progression of the messianic promise in the Old Testament is Walter C. Kaiser Jr., *Toward an Old Testament Theology* (Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 1978).
59. Matthew 1:1: "The book of the genealogy of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the son of Abraham."
60. Exodus 2:24: "God heard their groaning, and God remembered his covenant with Abraham, with Isaac, and with Jacob"; Exodus 6:4–8: "I also established my covenant with them to give them the land of Canaan, the land in which they lived as sojourners. Moreover, I have heard the groaning of the people of Israel whom the Egyptians hold as slaves, and I have remembered my covenant. Say therefore to the people of Israel, 'I am the LORD, and I will bring you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians, and I will deliver you from slavery to them, and I will redeem you with an outstretched arm and with great acts of judgment. I will take you to be my people, and I will be your God, and you shall know that I am the LORD your God, who has brought you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians.'"
61. Exodus 19:4: "You yourselves have seen what I did to the Egyptians, and how I bore you on eagles' wings and brought you to myself"; Exodus 20:2: "I am the LORD your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of slavery."
62. Bobette Buster, *Do Story: How to Tell Your Story So the World Listens* (London: The Do Book, 2013).
63. For example, Joshua 2:9–11; Judges 6:8–13; 1 Samuel 12:6–8; 1 Kings 8:51; 2 Chronicles 7:22; Nehemiah 9:9.
64. For example, Psalm 77:14–20; 78:12–55; 80:8; 106:7–12; 114; 136:10–22.
65. For example, Jeremiah 7:21–24; 11:1–18; 16:14–21; 34:13; Ezekiel 37:24–28 (affirming God's covenant in language like that used in the exodus); Hosea 11:1.
66. There *are* differences between the Abrahamic and Mosaic covenants. Kenneth Turner points out that "some discontinuity does exist. The Sinaitic covenant puts a lot of stress on conditionality—'if you will indeed obey my voice and keep my covenant, you shall be…' (Exod. 19:5). But there is conditional language in the Abrahamic covenant as well (see Genesis 12:1; 15:6; 17:1–2, 9–14; 18:19; 22:16–18; 26:2–5). Restoration following Israel's breaking of the (Sinaitic) covenant is consistently based on the Abrahamic promises. This is true in Exodus 32:13 following the golden calf incident and in Deuteronomy 4:31 following the exile, which means the Abrahamic covenant remained valid despite Israel's failure (cf. Galatians 3:15–29)."
67. When it comes to the wisdom literature—Job, Psalms, Proverbs, Song of Solomon, and Ecclesiastes—it's a little harder to see the flow of Scripture's metanarrative. The idea of the sage, the officially recognized wise man, was a whole new type of leader, different from a priest or prophet. The sage drew wisdom more from what we call "general revelation," from observation, experience, and tradition. The book of Proverbs presents life as straightforward: you reap what you sow. If you make right choices, you'll succeed; if you're a fool, you'll fail. This is called *normative* wisdom. But the books of Job and Ecclesiastes challenge the idea that life is so straightforward. Things don't always work out like you want them to. Bad things happen to good people. This is called *speculative* wisdom. The tension between normative wisdom (what life is always like under creation) and speculative wisdom (what life is often like under the fall) pictures the tension between God's faithfulness and Israel's lack of faith.
68. Genesis 17:6: "I will make you exceedingly fruitful, and I will make you into nations, and kings shall come from you"; Genesis 49:10: "The scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor the ruler's staff from between his feet, until tribute comes to him; and to him shall be the obedience of the peoples."
69. Judges 21:25: "In those days there was no king in Israel. Everyone did what was right in his own eyes."
70. 1 Kings 11:11: "The LORD said to Solomon, 'Since this has been your practice and you have not kept my covenant and my statutes that I have commanded you, I will surely tear the kingdom from you and will give it to your servant.'"
71. In actuality, the whole of the Old Testament is a story of God's covenant faithfulness. In Genesis, we see sibling rivalry, murder, arrogance, mistreatment of wives, lying, and perversion. And yet, God was faithful. In Exodus, the children of Israel can hardly make it out of Egypt before grumbling and building a golden calf to worship. And yet, God was faithful. In Leviticus, priests misbehave and Israel's leaders—Moses, Aaron, and Miriam—can't seem to stay out of trouble. And yet,

<!-- page-161 -->

God was faithful. In Deuteronomy, which specifically predicts Israel's inability to be faithful to God, which will lead to exile, God promises to be with them (Deut. 4:29–31). The ray of light provided by Joshua's leadership was extinguished as soon as he died. Israel became increasingly wicked and idolatrous. "In those days there was no king in Israel," says Judges 21:25. "Everyone did what was right in his own eyes."
72. See Isaiah 50; Jeremiah 3.
73. Deuteronomy 4:29–31: "From there you will seek the LORD your God and you will find him, if you search after him with all your heart and with all your soul. When you are in tribulation, and all these things come upon you in the latter days, you will return to the LORD your God and obey his voice. For the LORD your God is a merciful God. He will not leave you or destroy you or forget the covenant with your fathers that he swore to them."
74. See also Jeremiah 30–33; Ezekiel 36–37; Isaiah 40–66; Hosea 14; Amos 9:11–15; Micah 4–5.
75. Zechariah 9:9–13: "Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion! Shout aloud, O daughter of Jerusalem! Behold, your king is coming to you; righteous and having salvation is he, humble and mounted on a donkey, on a colt, the foal of a donkey. I will cut off the chariot from Ephraim and the war horse from Jerusalem; and the battle bow shall be cut off, and he shall speak peace to the nations; his rule shall be from sea to sea, and from the River to the ends of the earth. As for you also, because of the blood of my covenant with you, I will set your prisoners free from the waterless pit. Return to your stronghold, O prisoners of hope; today I declare that I will restore to you double. For I have bent Judah as my bow; I have made Ephraim its arrow. I will stir up your sons, O Zion, against your sons, O Greece, and wield you like a warrior's sword"; Zechariah 12:10–14: "I will pour out on the house of David and the inhabitants of Jerusalem a spirit of grace and pleas for mercy, so that, when they look on me, on him whom they have pierced, they shall mourn for him, as one mourns for an only child, and weep bitterly over him, as one weeps over a firstborn. On that day the mourning in Jerusalem will be as great as the mourning for Hadad-rimmon in the plain of Megiddo. The land shall mourn, each family by itself: the family of the house of David by itself, and their wives by themselves; the family of the house of Nathan by itself, and their wives by themselves; the family of the house of Levi by itself, and their wives by themselves; the family of the Shimeites by itself, and their wives by themselves; and all the families that are left, each by itself, and their wives by themselves."
