<!-- page-165 -->

# Chapter 7

# How to Read the Bible

## 1. The Dysfunctional Bible Study

Sophia: "Guys, I was reading the book of Jeremiah and came across the most amazing passage! It says, 'For I know the plans I have for you, declares the LORD, plans for welfare and not for evil, to give you a future and a hope. Then you will call upon me and come and pray to me, and I will hear you. You will seek me and find me, when you seek me with all your heart.'"¹

Mason: "Wow, that's cool!"

<!-- page-166 -->

Sophia: "Yeah, I think I'm going to make this my life verse. It gives me hope because it shows that God wants to bless me and give me a good job and an awesome husband someday."

Mason: "Uh-huh. I'm not a Christian, but I really like that verse. What it means to me is, God is cool with where I am in life and he wants me to feel good and have a great life."

Noah: "Guys, are you sure that's what it means? I'm not sure we're supposed to read it in such a personal way."

Mason: "Who are you to say what Sophia's verse means to me? It means one thing to her and something else to me. If God is telling you something different, that's cool."

Susannah: "Well, that can't be what it means because I've always been taught that God has plans for you only if you are a Christian."

Sophia: "But that sounds really cruel. A good God wouldn't ignore people just because they don't fit your definition of Christianity!"

Susannah: "I don't think we need to argue. We can all be right. Maybe we should just pray about it."

Mason: "What good will *that* do? It means what it means to me, and it means what it means to you. There's no point in praying about it."

Aiden: "Not pray? But I like praying. I feel different when I pray. It makes me feel like God is my best friend."

Noah: "You pray because of how it makes you feel?"

Aiden: "Sure. When Jesus walked along the road to Emmaus, the guys he was with said the same thing."

Noah: "What thing?"

Aiden: "That their hearts burned within them when they were with him."²

Noah: "But that's because his teaching was true, not because he made them feel good about themselves."

Chloe: "Well, I hate to interrupt, but even if we don't all agree, God has still met us here today. You know, the Bible says, 'Where two or three are gathered in my name, there am I among them.'"³

Jacob: "I love having studies like this. It's like God is showing us things from the Bible that no one has ever noticed before!"

Noah: "Guys, I just have this bad feeling that we're making it about us and how we feel rather than about God."

Jacob: "Well, isn't it about us? I mean, God loves us, so isn't that the whole point?"

## 2. What Is Scripture All about, Exactly?

Have you ever been in a discussion like this? Or has someone ever forwarded you an email or shared a Facebook meme that uses some part of a Bible verse completely out of context? Maybe you've heard a speaker or seen a Christian book using a Bible story to illustrate some unrelated point (the story of David and Goliath is often used this way). It's common. Without really even thinking about it, we have probably all done it.

Although we may be convinced of the Bible's authority as God's revelation to human beings, we might sometimes have interpreted the Bible improperly. Most of the students in the above-mentioned scenario want to know God personally, and that's good. But rather than try

<!-- page-167 -->

to understand the text's true meaning, they are reading through the filter of their own desires and cultural understandings, as though desires give rise to meaning; others assume that the meaning of Scripture is flexible, making context irrelevant.

But the Bible is about God, not us. It does not bend to our thoughts or desires; rather, it expresses what God thinks and has planned.

> **The Bible is about God, not us. It does not bend to our thoughts or desires; rather, it expresses what God thinks and has planned.**

It is hard to blame these students, though; their approaches seem almost natural, given the times we live in. In order to raise interest in the Bible, publishers have customized it for many people's life situations, leaving the impression that the Bible's importance somehow depends on its immediate impact on us. There's an all-weather outdoor Bible, an army Bible, a cowboy Bible, a Bible for brides, a biker Bible—even a Bible published for teen girls, formatted like a magazine, with "Are you dating a godly guy?" on the cover; a boy's Bible promises "gross and gory Bible stuff," and a "pink and sparkly" *God's Little Princess Devotional Bible* offers girls the fantasy fun of playing pretend.⁴

The endless stream of customized Bibles, while perhaps nothing more than an amusing example of mostly harmless free-market excess, runs the risk of disguising the Bible's true intent, which is to reveal the One who alone is worthy of our trust. If we truly desire to see the authority of God's Word elevated in our world, we must learn how to read—and *live*—the Bible so that others come to know God and become Jesus's disciples.

> **If we truly desire to see the authority of God's Word elevated in our world, we must learn how to read—and *live*—the Bible so that others come to know God and become Jesus's disciples.**

The impulse to make Christianity easy and user friendly can come back to bite us. As Francis Chan notes,

> We have done everything humanly possible to make church "easy." We kept the services short and entertaining, discipleship and evangelism optional, and moral standards low. Our motives were not bad. We figured we could attract more people by offering Jesus with minimal commitment. But we ended up producing nominal Christians whose unchanged lives have deterred others from being interested.⁵

Reading the Bible poorly both *causes* and is *symptomatic* of "easy" Christianity. Learning to handle Scripture properly, on the other hand, can help us think more carefully about the Christian faith, which in turn can lead to better Christian lives. In this chapter, we'll approach the Bible as a book God intends us to read, understand, ponder, pray over, and live out. The Bible serves as a fixed point in a world overrun by postmodern skepticism, but in order for us to really grasp its power, we must first learn how to read it well and truly.

> **Most believers over the centuries did not have Bibles of their own, nor did they know much about the Bible's contents. Most couldn't even read!**

<!-- page-168 -->

## 3. Tolle Lege: Pick Up and Read

Most believers over the centuries did not have Bibles of their own, nor did they know much about the Bible's contents. Most couldn't even read! The only way to get a Bible was to go to a church or synagogue and beg to see one. But Johannes Gutenberg's printing press, employing movable type, planted the seeds of change. In fact, historian Elizabeth Eisenstein argues, the mass production of Martin Luther's writings (more than three hundred thousand books and pamphlets sold just from 1517 to 1520) is what gave life to the Protestant Reformation, establishing a Christian tradition embraced by nearly a billion people in the world today. According to Eisenstein, the Reformation was a movement "shaped at the very outset (and in large part ushered in) by the new powers of the press."⁶

As a result, the Bible has profoundly affected every aspect of Western culture. Today the ready availability of the Bible is leading to such rapid evangelism in the global south that South America and Africa may soon become the continents with the greatest number of Christians.⁷

Let's be honest, though. Although there is no book so popular and available as the Bible, still it is little read. It's like a pile of kindling without a match: unless it is lit, it can provide neither heat nor light. As Mark Twain said, "A person who won't read has no advantage over a person who can't read."⁸

> **Although there is no book so popular and available as the Bible, still it is little read. It's like a pile of kindling without a match: unless it is lit, it can provide neither heat nor light.**

Illiteracy by choice is not a new problem. More than a millennia and a half ago, a young playboy complained, "We have no leisure to read. Where are we to find the books? How or when could I get ahold of them? From whom could I borrow them?"⁹ Even 1,500 years ago, this was a false complaint. The young man's problem wasn't a lack of books; it was lack of interest. But one day he heard a child in a neighboring house chanting, "Pick it up and read it. Pick it up and read it" (in Latin: "*Tolle lege*"). Taking this as a sign from God, the young man picked up the Bible and began reading. When he encountered the apostle Paul's letter to the Romans—"Let us walk properly as in the daytime, not in orgies and drunkenness, not in sexual immorality and sensuality, not in quarreling and jealousy. But put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no provision for the flesh, to gratify its desires" (Rom. 13:13–14)—this young man, Augustine of Hippo, recognized his own sinfulness, committed his life to Christ, and ultimately became one of the world's most revered and influential theologians.¹⁰ You can read his story in his book *Confessions*.

Just as the Bible changed everything for Augustine, it can change us today, but only if we approach it properly. Says theologian N. T. Wright,

> [G]od intends that we should have this book and should read and study it, individually and corporately; and that this book, by the power of the Spirit, bears witness in a thousand ways to Jesus himself, and to what God has accomplished through him.… [T]he Bible isn't simply a repository of true information about God, Jesus, and the hope of the world. It is, rather, part of *the means by which*, in the power of the Spirit, the living God rescues his people and his world, and takes them forward on the journey toward his new creation, and makes us agents of that new creation even as we travel.¹¹

<!-- page-169 -->

The Bible has tremendous power. If we read it poorly or self-centeredly, however, we might not sense its power or see that power at work in our lives and culture. Let's talk about that next.

## 4. Why Is It So Common to Read the Bible with a Self-Centered Focus?

If you've ever found yourself reading the Bible and asking yourself, *What does this mean to me?* you're not alone. We're all searching for answers to our most pressing questions, and we naturally hope the Bible, like aspirin, will relieve life's everyday pains.

This hope, though, seems to have grown into a kind of narcissism, part of a larger cultural mood that promotes a hyperpersonalized approach to *all* of life. This cultural mood has a name: **Postmodernism**.

> **Postmodernism:** a skeptical worldview, founded as a reaction to modernism, that is suspicious of metanarratives and teaches that ultimate reality is inaccessible, that knowledge is a social construct, and that truth claims are political power plays.

Academically, Postmodernism developed as scholars responded to the failure of modern science and technology to produce a utopian existence. As a response, Postmodernists turned their attention away from "capital T truth" to small, localized truths that were constructed through people's individual and cultural experiences.

Culturally, Postmodernism affects how we think about everything, including the Bible. Postmodernists say that we can really know only our *descriptions* of the world, not the world itself. Our talk about the world, they say, isn't really about the world at all but about us. In 1968, French literary theorist Roland Barthes wrote "The Death of the Author," a short essay in which he argued that we should not value the *origin* of a text (i.e., the author's intentions) as much as its *destination* (i.e., the reader's experience). Readers should free themselves from the author's single intended meaning and invent new meanings.¹²

> **Deconstruction:** a method of literary analysis that questions the ability of language to represent reality adequately and seeks to discern and expose the purported underlying ideologies of a text.

If we cannot really know the world truly, then we certainly cannot learn anything about the world from a written work. For Postmodernism, texts claiming to speak the truth must undergo a **deconstruction** to reveal their underlying assumptions and intentions.¹³ Even as you read this chapter, Postmodernists would say that you are not learning to understand the world as it actually is but rather you are merging together the concepts in this text with your experiences and your culture's influences. There is no real world "out there" for us to know.¹⁴ They believe that what you think is true may be true for you but that it does not mean it is true for anyone else.¹⁵ Once someone embraces assumptions like these, it becomes difficult to properly interpret the Bible. Even so, many Christians today embrace Postmodernist assumptions.

<!-- page-170 -->

Today there is a significant discussion among Christians whether Postmodernism is compatible with orthodox Christianity.¹⁶ Theologian D. A. Carson is one bothered by the postmodern impulse, primarily because of its focus on self. In *Becoming Conversant with the Emerging Church*, he makes the following observation:

> An omniscient, talking God changes everything. It does not change the fact that I will always be finite and that my knowledge of him and about him will always be partial. But once I know that he exists, that he is the Creator and my Savior and Judge, it is improper, even idolatrous, to try to think of my knowing things without reference to him. All of my knowledge, if it is true knowledge, is necessarily a subset of his.¹⁷

In other words, the Bible's authoritative revelation is about what God actually communicates, whether we feel good about it or not. Our part is learning to respond appropriately.

Unfortunately, well-meaning people read the Bible poorly, leading them to misunderstand and misapply it in their lives or even to manipulate others. Fortunately, however, we can learn to study Scripture carefully. To get started, let's look at some commonly made mistakes and see if we can find correctives, restoring the excitement and joy of actually reading—and grasping—God's Word.

## 5. Ten Common Mistakes in Reading the Bible and How to Fix Them

The mistakes people make—and I have certainly made my share—can be corrected through a little intellectual discipline. This begins with a strong *hermeneutic*. The term **hermeneutics** (from the Greek word *hermeneuo*, "to interpret") describes the process of devising correct methods of interpreting Scripture.¹⁸ As we look at each mistake and how to correct it, we'll put in place hermeneutic building blocks that increase the accuracy of our interpretations and thus our knowledge of God.

> ***Hermeneutics:*** **from the Greek for "interpret"; the process of devising the best methods for understanding and interpreting Scripture.**

**Mistake 1: We assume that the Bible doesn't need to be interpreted.** Some believe that the Bible does not need interpretation—that it speaks for itself. Some pastors even reject listing out their beliefs, saying instead, "The Bible is our doctrinal statement." It sounds noble, but what does it mean, exactly? Does it mean that everything people did in Bible times (slaughtering enemies, taking multiple wives, living in tents) should be done by us today? If the answer is "No, that's not what the Bible means to us today," that pastor has just engaged in an act of interpretation.

We cannot escape the fact that even though the Bible is the authoritative, inspired, inerrant Word of God, it still must be interpreted. As theologians Gordon Fee and Douglas Stuart point out,

> The first reason one needs to learn *how* to interpret is that, whether one likes it or not, every reader is at the same time an interpreter. That is, most of us assume as we

<!-- page-171 -->

> read that we also understand what we read. We also tend to think that our understanding is the same thing as the Holy Spirit's or human author's intent. However, we invariably bring to the text all that we are, with all of our experiences, culture, and prior understandings of words and ideas. Sometimes what we bring to the text, unintentionally to be sure, leads us astray, or else causes us to read all kinds of foreign ideas into the text.¹⁹

We need interpretation when reading the Bible for the same reason that we need interpretation when trying to communicate something to people in another language. When I travel to countries where another language is spoken, I don't just want a translator who tells the audience what is being *said*; I want an interpreter to help them understand what is *meant*. Similarly, with Scripture, if we don't have a proper interpretation, we can easily delude ourselves into thinking we know what God means when, in fact, we do not.

> **With Scripture, if we don't have a proper interpretation, we can easily delude ourselves into thinking we know what God means when, in fact, we do not.**

**Mistake 2: We assume that the Bible applies uniquely to us.** As they connect with the text, some people make the mistake of *individualizing* it, which means supposing that any or all parts apply to them in a unique way, outside of their original context. Examples of personalizing would be "The story of Balaam's talking donkey reminds me that I talk too much" or "The story of the building of the temple is God's way of telling us that we have to construct a new church building."²⁰

In the dysfunctional Bible study at the opening of this chapter, Sophia stumbled into precisely this problem. She imagined Jeremiah 29:11—"For I know the plans I have for you, declares the LORD, plans for welfare and not for evil, to give you a future and a hope"—to be a personal promise of blessing, from God to *her*. However, these words were not written to her. They served as a prophecy to the nation of Israel at a particular point in time based on its own particular circumstances.

Another example is 2 Chronicles 7:14: "If my people who are called by my name humble themselves, and pray and seek my face and turn from their wicked ways, then I will hear from heaven and will forgive their sin and heal their land." This does not mean that God promises to make our nation godlier if citizens pray. We may love 2 Chronicles 7:14, but misapplying this verse to our own nation ignores the passage's original, intended audience: the nation of Israel, addressed at a specific time, for a specific reason. It should not be immediately applied to another country, at another time, for a different reason.

> **To approach the text well, before we focus on ourselves or our current circumstances, we should first focus on God—how to deepen and enrich our understanding of him.**

To approach the text well, before we focus on ourselves or our current circumstances, we should first focus on God—how to deepen and enrich our understanding of him. Is God the kind of deity who cares about our people's welfare? Yes! Does he have the future in mind? Yes! Is he the proper object of hope? Yes! Does he want us to be in communication with his image bearers? Yes! Does

<!-- page-172 -->

he want us to call on him? Yes! By looking at the full context of the text, we learn more about who God shows himself to be and how he has dealt with his people in the past. From this we get insight into his unchanging nature and character and can better understand how we might more fully bear his image.

**Mistake 3: We ignore passages that don't fit our theology.** When people try to make sense of all of Scripture, they often create a *system*, or a sort of file cabinet into which everything in Scripture fits neatly. This **systematic theology** is not bad in and of itself, but it can go bad if people choose to highlight some verses rather than others as a way to make artificial space for their developed theology. For example, some people emphasize passages that call for believers to separate from the culture and they ignore passages that call believers to engage culture. Or they choose one set of verses about salvation and then minimize others. Scratch just about any controversial issue that separates Christians and it will bleed selective application.

> ***Systematic Theology:*** **a form of theological inquiry that aims to arrange and categorize religious truths into an internally consistent system.**

We must value all Scripture, not just the sections that serve our agendas. The Bible should not merely tell us what we already know or only the things we want to hear. The apostle Paul said in 2 Timothy 3:16–17, "All Scripture is breathed out by God and profitable for teaching, for reproof, for correction, and for training in righteousness, that the man of God may be competent, equipped for every good work."

When we ignore or minimize or explain away sections of the Bible that we don't like or understand, we commit a serious error. Theologian Wayne Grudem warns,

> It must be noted that these words [the Bible] are still considered to be God's own words, even though they are written down mostly by human beings and always in human language. Still they are absolutely authoritative and absolutely true: to disobey them or to disbelieve them is a serious sin and brings judgment from God (1 Cor. 14:37; Jer. 36:29–31).²¹

The corrective to ignoring the parts of the Bible that don't fit our theology is simple: we must approach it with a posture of humility, making *ourselves* fit *it* rather than trying to make *it* fit *us*.

**Mistake 4: We treat the Bible allegorically.** For much of church history, theologians have treated **allegory** as a legitimate way to read the Bible. The biblical narratives can help us understand how to live better. But when the main use of Scripture is to, for example, employ the story of David and Goliath to show that we need to be courageous or the story of Noah to show what it looks like to fight for our family's survival or the story of Jonah to display the consequences of being "swallowed up" because of our disobedience, it becomes little more than a bedtime storybook, such as *Aesop's Fables*.

> ***Allegory:*** **a fictional narrative in which characters and events are presented as symbols for moral and spiritual truths.**

<!-- page-173 -->

Certainly, we can learn from the life experiences of others, including those who lived in biblical times, and draw lessons that help us live better lives. Rather than view it as merely allegorical, though, we must see the entire Bible as the whole counsel of God, a comprehensive narrative that tells God's story in the world, not as a repository or "greatest hits" of favorite stories. Anglican theologian Graeme Goldsworthy states, "It is important to see that all human history from creation to new creation belongs to God's sovereign work and purpose. While the biblical focus is on the history of a specifically chosen people of God, the whole of human history is indirectly included."²²

> **We need to see that Scripture doesn't exist to make us feel smart or to cause other people to think well of us. It exists to reveal God's nature and character, and we are to devote ourselves to its—even apparently mundane—"old" truths.**

**Mistake 5: We feel that our study is fruitless if we have not discovered a new truth.** I love the "Aha!" moment—such as the sun breaking through the clouds—of grasping something I haven't understood before. It makes me feel clever. But my desire to be clever can stand in the way of grasping God's truth. As Gordon Fee and Douglas Stuart note, "Let it be said at the outset—and repeated throughout—that the aim of good interpretation is not uniqueness; one is not trying to discover what no one else has ever seen before."²³ The problem, they say, is pride:

> Interpretation that aims at, or thrives on, uniqueness can usually be attributed to pride (an attempt to "outclever" the rest of the world), a false understanding of spirituality (wherein the Bible is full of deeply buried truths waiting to be mined by the spiritually sensitive person with special insight), or vested interests (the need to support a theological bias, especially in dealing with texts that seem to go against that bias). Unique interpretations are usually wrong. This is not to say that the correct understanding of a text may not often seem unique to someone who hears it for the first time. But it is to say that uniqueness is *not* the aim of our task.²⁴

Instead, we need to see that Scripture doesn't exist to make us feel smart or to cause other people to think well of us. It exists to reveal God's nature and character, and we are to devote ourselves to its—even apparently mundane—"old" truths.

**Mistake 6: We focus on what the text "means to me."** What the text means to someone personally is not of first importance. Many readers today are confused by this. They wonder, *Aren't I supposed to apply this to my life?* Of course they are, but not until they understand what the text actually says. Postmodernists, such as Jacques Derrida, say that statements about meaning are not meaningful. We should be suspicious of this claim for one simple reason: Derrida and others who make the claim all assume that their own statements about meaning are meaningful. Meaning *does* exist. Knowing our own frailty should make it easier to give the benefit of the doubt to the meaning intended by the author (the human writer operating under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit) rather than to ourselves.

<!-- page-174 -->

**Mistake 7: We assume the Bible isn't relevant to us today.** Some people, miffed at not being able to make Scripture fit their expectations, go to the opposite extreme and assume it has no relevance to them at all. This is an immature approach. Reading Scripture is like going to a dance: you can't really enjoy it just leaning against the wall. God intends for us to *connect* with the text. As theologian Gene Fant states,

> What I ask my students to consider is the hermeneutics of optimism, a way of looking at the text in a way that is critical but not cynical, probing but not suspicious, that is a way that seeks connection rather than isolation. This is why I stress the communal nature of narrative. The reader participates in the process not through the creation of subgroups (which end up spiraling into subjective/individualistic ramblings that are solipsistic or egomaniacal) that randomly assign meaning but by entering into an agreement with the writer that there *is* meaning in the text and that the author and the audience can connect with one another, creating a relationship of sorts that not only identifies meaning but carries it directly into the hearts, minds, and souls of the readers, applying it to their own lives in ways that are life-changing.²⁵

Connecting to the text calls for a posture of prayer. Theologian Rob Plummer says, "As we approach the Bible, we need to realize that sin affects all of our being—our emotions, wills, and rational faculties. We can easily deceive ourselves or be deceived by others. We need the Holy Spirit to instruct and guide us. Thus, prayer is the essential starting point for any study of the Bible."²⁶ We might begin with the prayer of King David: "Open my eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of your law" (Ps. 119:18).

**Mistake 8: We take the Bible out of context.** Similar to overpersonalizing Scripture, Christians also commonly misapply verses to their contemporary institutions that were originally intended in a specific way for a specific audience. A common example is Matthew 18:19–20, which says, "Again I say to you, if two of you agree on earth about anything they ask, it will be done for them by my Father in heaven. For where two or three are gathered in my name, there I am among them." This is often taken as a promise that whenever believers get together to pray in the name of Jesus, God will do whatever they ask. But if you back up just four verses, it is clear that Jesus is referring to bringing two or three witnesses in to help resolve a conflict. In fact, the phrase "two or three witnesses," although used several times in Scripture, is never used except in reference to the testimony of witnesses in establishing justice.²⁷

> **Christians also commonly misapply verses to their contemporary institutions that were originally intended in a specific way for a specific audience.**

Rather than focusing on our present circumstances, we must instead approach the text focused on God: Does how he called out to his people *then* apply to us *today*? Perhaps, but probably not in the way most people think. We cannot assume, or "compute," that God, acting formulaically, will act with our nation as he acted with Israel. He hasn't made us that promise. We can say, however, that this passage reveals some consistent aspects of God's nature and character that have always been true, such as God's calling people to himself, his

<!-- page-175 -->

humility, his desire for us to pray, and his hope that we turn from wickedness. If we stop trying to claim promises as belonging to us in ways they may not, we might be free to focus on God, on what he wants, rather than on whether our nation is failing to receive blessings.

**Mistake 9: We interpret the Bible based on contemporary moral standards.** The Bible is *eternally relevant* in that "it speaks to all humankind, in every age and in every culture."²⁸ Yet the Bible was communicated in certain languages, times, and cultures. It has *historical particularity*. Scripture's eternal relevance and its historical particularity are in tension.²⁹ This tension, though, is good, like the tension we might experience when we exercise, so do the heavy lifting if you want to grow stronger!

> **Dismissing the Bible's teachings to accommodate contemporary views robs God's Word of its immense power, which in turn robs us of the power to live full, healthy lives that glorify God.**

But some pastors and commentators don't like this tension. They want the Bible to be easy for both Christians and non-Christians to embrace. For example, when people object to the Bible's operating assumption—and clear teaching—on a sexual relationship being appropriate only between a man and woman married to each other, they might do so by arguing that the Bible's teaching on sexuality was related to a particular historical practice and is not relevant today.

Instead, we should ask, "How does the Scripture describe us, our world, and God?" Dismissing the Bible's teachings to accommodate contemporary views robs God's Word of its immense power, which in turn robs us of the power to live full, healthy lives that glorify God.

**Mistake 10: We try to make the Bible fit contemporary standards for political correctness.** It is embarrassing for some Christians that the Bible says "man" when these days we say "person" and that the Bible says "he" when we say "they." Surely these can be changed without changing the fundamental meaning, right? Unfortunately, in an effort to make translations clearer regarding gender inclusion, some translators have actually distorted the meaning of passages. Pastor Tim Keller offers an example in his book *Galatians for You*. In Galatians 4, the apostle Paul uses an analogy about the inheritance of "sons." Some translators, wanting to be more inclusive, have changed the wording to "children." This, according to Keller, is a mistake:

> Many take offense at using the masculine word "sons" to refer to all Christians, male and female. Some would prefer to translate verse 26: "You are all children of God" (as the NIV 2011 does). But if we are too quick to correct the biblical language, we miss the revolutionary (and radically egalitarian) nature of what Paul is saying. In most ancient cultures, daughters could not inherit property. Therefore "son" meant "legal heir," which was a status forbidden to women. But the gospel tells us we are all *sons* of God in Christ. We are *all* heirs. Similarly, the Bible describes all Christians together, including men, as the "bride of Christ" (Revelation 21:2). God is even-handed in His gender-specific metaphors. Men are part of His son's bride; and women are His sons. His heirs. If we don't let Paul call Christian women "sons of God," we miss how radical and wonderful a claim this is.³⁰

<!-- page-176 -->

Before we bow to the current way of seeing things, we must keep in mind that what is new is not necessarily true.

In the end, the big mistakes people make when reading the Bible can be remedied by trusting God to be bigger than culture and interpreting biblical texts more faithfully. As Gordon Fee and Douglas Stuart counsel, "A *text cannot mean what it never meant.* Or to put it in a positive way, the true meaning of the biblical text for us is what God originally intended it to mean when it was first spoken. This is the starting point."³¹

Now that we have examined ten common mistakes in reading the Bible and offered correctives for them, let's go one step further and look at ten principles of how to read the Bible in a way that unleashes its true power.

## 6. Ten Steps to Reading the Bible Well and Truly

The ten mistakes we discussed focus on what we should *not* do. But what *should* we do? How might we read Scripture *well*, avoiding pitfalls?

Earlier, we used the term *hermeneutics* to describe the general principles of interpreting Scripture. Good hermeneutics begins first and foremost with another technical term theologians use, **exegesis**, which refers to the proper interpretation of a particular passage of Scripture.³² That is, large-scale interpretation (hermeneutics) must begin with the small-scale, difficult-but-rewarding work of wrestling with each chapter, verse, line, and word (**exegesis**) (we must also be careful of the danger of **eisegesis**, which means reading our own biases and cultural assumptions into the text).

> ***Exegesis:*** **from the Greek for "lead out"; the exposition or explanation of a biblical text based on careful study and analysis.**

How do we proceed? To Fee and Stuart, "the key to good exegesis, and therefore to more intelligent reading of the Bible, is *to learn to read the text carefully and to ask the right questions of the text*."³³ You should note that attention must be paid to both the details and the big picture. As N. T. Wright states,

> How then is scripture to be interpreted?… We take account of the nature of each book, each chapter, each syllable. Contexts, meanings within particular cultures, the overall place of a book, a theme, a line within the culture and time and within the scope and sweep of scripture itself—all these things matter. Exploring them with the rigor and attention they deserve constitutes a massive task, though there are today all kinds of encouragements and helps in undertaking it.³⁴

We can easily see, then, how massive and comprehensive interpreting Scripture can become. To make it easier, let's take a look at a ten-step process that positions us to ask the right questions of the text and get meaningful answers.

**Step 1: Commit to reading the Bible and studying it.** Too often, when learning about the Bible, people wrongly assume that pastors' and commentators' words and arguments should replace their own personal study of the Bible. But Gene Fant chides,

<!-- page-177 -->

> For people who call themselves "The People of the Book," most Christians do not read the Bible very much. We talk about it, we sermonize about it, we even read other books about it, but we spend precious little time actually reading it. Worse, we rarely read the Bible's actual stories once we reach adulthood. In fact, professional Christians such as pastors may be the guiltiest about this. Reading secondary texts about the Bible is no substitute for reading the Bible itself.³⁵

As a young Christian, I also fell into the habit of reading books *about* the Bible rather than reading the Bible itself. The authors I read were so brilliant and witty that my own reading of the Bible felt clumsy and inefficient.

But Bible reading is not something that should be "left to the pros." Imagine if only professionals played sports, or told jokes, or played music, or wrote poetry. How much emptier the world would be! In effect, though, this is what I was doing with the Bible. It never occurred to me that, while I should certainly care what "the pros" said, I should also read and study the Bible myself.

> **You can't get in shape by watching other people exercise, nor can you grasp the Bible just by reading *about* it. You have to get seriously into the text.**

Take the time, then, to *really* read the Bible. You can't get in shape by watching other people exercise, nor can you grasp the Bible just by reading *about* it. You have to get seriously into the text.

**Step 2: Read the Bible in context.** The best understanding comes from reading Scripture in chunks. Never content yourself with reading a single Bible verse. Verses belong to paragraphs, paragraphs belong to chapters, chapters belong to books, and books fit into the Bible as a whole. Understanding context helps us avoid straying from the text's plain meaning.³⁶ A good foreign-language interpreter does not insert his own meanings or render what "should have been" said. Instead, he renders his source faithfully. If he has questions, he asks the source. The same goes for a written text. As professor Michael Bauman says, "A text means what its author intends it to mean, not what a reader wants it to mean."³⁷

Bible study is whole-life engagement. It always has been, even in Bible times. As the children of Israel were about to enter into the Promised Land, Moses told them,

> You shall therefore lay up these words of mine in your heart and in your soul, and you shall bind them as a sign on your hand, and they shall be as frontlets between your eyes. You shall teach them to your children, talking of them when you are walking by the way, and when you are sitting in your house, and when you lie down, and when you rise. You shall write them on the doorposts of your house and on your gates, that your days and the days of your children may be multiplied in the land that the LORD swore to your fathers to give them, as long as the heavens are above the earth. For if you will be careful to do all this commandment that I command you to do, loving the LORD your God, walking in all his ways, and holding fast to him, then the LORD will drive out all these nations before you, and you will dispossess nations greater and mightier than you. (Deut. 11:18–23)

<!-- page-178 -->

**Step 3: Choose a translation.** It is important to begin your study of God's Word with a solid translation reflecting the realities of the original ancient texts. There are three types of translations, according to Fee and Stuart.

> **It is important to begin your study of God's Word with a solid translation reflecting the realities of the original ancient texts.**

*Formal equivalence translations.* "These translations … attempt to keep as close to the 'form' of the Hebrew or Greek, both words and grammar, as can be conveniently put into understandable English. The closer one stays to the Hebrew or Greek idiom, the closer one moves toward a theory of translation often described as 'literal.' Translations based on formal equivalence will keep historical distance intact at all points."³⁸ Examples are the King James Version (KJV), the New King James Version (NKJV), the New American Standard Bible (NASB), and the English Standard Version (ESV).³⁹

*Functional equivalence translations.* These translations "attempt to keep the meaning of the Hebrew or Greek but to put their words and idioms into what would be the normal way of saying the same thing in English."⁴⁰ Examples are the New American Bible (NAB), the New Jerusalem Bible (NJB), the New Living Translation (NLT), and the New Revised Standard Version (NRSV). The New International Version (NIV) and Today's New International Version (TNIV) are somewhere in the middle between formal equivalence and functional equivalence.

*Free translations.* These translations "attempt to translate the *ideas* from one language to another, with less concern about using the exact words of the original. A free translation, sometimes also called a paraphrase, tries to eliminate as much of the historical distance as possible and still be faithful to the text."⁴¹ Examples are the New English Bible (NEB), the Living Bible (TLB), and *The Message* (THE MESSAGE).

*The Message* has been particularly popular in the last fifteen years or so. It was written by a pastor named Eugene Peterson as a way of helping his congregants see the relevance of Scripture in a new light. While it is an interesting read, we must keep in mind that it is a *paraphrase* of the original Hebrew and Greek.

So which one should you choose? Perhaps, as Fee and Stuart suggest, "It is far better to use several translations, note where they differ, and then check out these differences in another source."⁴² This is fairly easy with online Bible programs such as www.biblegateway.com, which offers several translations at the click of a mouse, or biblehub.com, which shows various translations side by side at a glance.

If you have the opportunity to pick out a Bible, look for one that's a study Bible. Even with this, one must be careful, though. Robert Plummer counsels,

> A study Bible provides extensive notes on the text of Scripture.… For a young Christian, a study Bible can be very helpful by providing brief summaries and historical backgrounds for each book of the Bible, supplying discussion of difficult and debated texts, and offering cross-references and indices. Wrongly used, a study Bible can provide a crutch that discourages Christians from thinking about and wrestling

<!-- page-179 -->

> with texts for themselves. Also, if a person purchases a study Bible from an avowed theological perspective, one faces the danger of letting theological predilections take priority over the text of Scripture.⁴³

**Step 4: Understand the genre.** Next, to understand a specific Bible passage, identify its **biblical genre**, or type. Just as there are musical genres, such as country, hip-hop, and classical, there are several different genres of literature present in the Bible. These include poetry, historical narratives (of which the Gospels and Acts are subcategories), legal prescriptions, prophecies, psalms, proverbs (and other forms of wisdom literature), parables, epistles ("letters"), and apocalyptic literature (e.g., Daniel and Revelation).

> ***Biblical Genre:*** **a classification of literary styles used in Scripture, including poetry, historical narratives, legal prescriptions, prophesies, psalms, proverbs, parables, epistles, and apocalyptic literature.**

Understanding the genre helps us determine how to interpret a passage properly. For example, psalms are a kind of poetry, full of figurative and symbolic language, and we ought to take this into account as we approach the text. We understand, for example, the highly figurative and symbolic nature of Psalm 17:8, "Keep me as the apple of your eye; hide me in the shadow of your wings." Obviously, this does not literally mean God's eye has an apple in it or that he has wings. But we wouldn't (or shouldn't) read the report about manna falling from heaven (Exod. 16) or one of the Ten Commandments (Exod. 20; Deut. 5) so figuratively. Rather, these texts are more straightforward, and the principles of their genres help us understand them more clearly.

Each genre comes with its own set of interpretive principles. Says Graeme Goldsworthy, "The issue is not that of giving a piece of text a precise name of genre identification, but rather that of understanding the variety of ways that literature can be used to communicate."⁴⁴ For example, a proverb, by definition, is *not* a prophecy or promise. To misunderstand this point can create great damage. Just imagine how heartbroken a parent would be if she had taken Proverbs 22:6—"Train up a child in the way he should go; even when he is old he will not depart from it"—as a promise, only to have her child leave the faith. Sadly, far too many people have abandoned Christianity precisely because of misunderstandings like this.

Understanding genres also helps us grapple with some of the uncomfortable things the Bible's historical narrative records. Historical narratives report what happened, whether good or bad. They are not commands for how we ought to live; they are descriptive, not prescriptive (more on this in step 10). Thus, we do not need to explain away why some biblical character had two wives, for example, or why Jephthah committed the immoral act of sacrificing his daughter (Judg. 11:39–40).⁴⁵

> ***Context:*** **the discourse surrounding a passage that gives meaning to the content; the historical background and literary setting of a text that helps clarify meaning.**

**Step 5: Understand the context.** By **context** we mean the historical and literary basis for a text as well as the discourse surrounding a passage that gives meaning

<!-- page-180 -->

to the content. **Historical context** refers to "the time and culture of the author and his readers, that is the geographical, topographical, and political factors that are relevant to the author's setting; and the occasion of the book, letter, psalm, prophetic oracle, or other genre."⁴⁶ Two questions to ask are "What occasioned the writing?" and "What is the purpose of the writing?"⁴⁷

> ***Historical Context:*** **the time, place, culture, and audience of a text.**

Paul T. Penley, a theologian who loves studying the culture of Bible times, offers an interesting strategy for understanding context. In his book *Reenacting the Way (of Jesus)*, Penley suggests asking, "What is the biblical author or character in the story doing? What cultural norm is being challenged or borrowed by the biblical author? How does the Bible direct its ancient readers to take on that cultural norm?"⁴⁸

For example, Penley says, in Matthew 5:39 Jesus says to "turn the other cheek." What is the context of this? In the time of Jesus, Roman soldiers could be quite abusive. Most were right-handed, which means if they struck you on the right cheek, it is because they backhanded you—a gesture of insult as well as of abuse. To turn your left cheek to them also, then, is to force the soldier to strike you with his fist, the way he might if in a fight with a peer. Offering the left cheek, according to Penley, might not be the act of subservience it has often been portrayed to be; rather, it may be an invitation to "hit me like a man." Penley explains, "[Jesus] wants to make each attacker stop and think about how they are mistreating another human being."⁴⁹ In this case, "turning the other cheek" is not blanket acceptance of brutality or immorality. It is a plan for change. It is a strategy for motivating others toward lasting repentance."⁵⁰

Penley's explanation is certainly compelling. Is he right? Well, to find out you'd have to talk to scholars of that time period, examine other historical sources, and look at the interpretation others have given of this passage. This is the work of understanding the historical context.

**Literary context**, though, is different from historical context. Literary context refers to the genre, structure, and grammar of a text. As Fee and Stuart phrase it, the "biblical sentences for the most part only have clear meaning in relation to preceding and succeeding sentences." They continue, "The most important contextual question you will ever ask—and it must be asked over and over of every sentence and every paragraph—is, 'What's the point?'"⁵¹ In Genesis 22, the struggle and pathos of the story of Abraham's attempted sacrifice of Isaac is understood more clearly when we realize what Abraham himself realized only after the fact: that this is a test from God ("After these things God tested Abraham," Gen. 22:1). Understanding Jesus's discussion of the Sabbath in Matthew 12 makes better sense in light of his statement at the end of Matthew 11: "Come to me, all who labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest" (v. 28). The overall structure and progression of the book of Acts hinges on Jesus's promise and mention of increased geographical regions in Acts 1:8: "You will receive power when the Holy Spirit has come upon you, and you will be my witnesses in Jerusalem and in all Judea and Samaria, and to the end of the earth."

> ***Literary Context:*** **the genre, structure, and grammar of a text.**

Paying attention to the literary context in the smaller stories can help us also understand the overarching story of the Bible: the metanarrative. The Bible is not just a collection of great stories that express our shared heritage; it is connected to the present as well, which means we cannot read it as just an account of past events. As Gene Fant says, "Learning from stories

<!-- page-181 -->

requires us to read in a way that is active, that seeks to find connection between even the most ancient of authors and the challenges of our own circumstances."⁵² Michael Goheen expands ever further:

> When we speak of the biblical story as a narrative we are making an ontological claim. It is a claim that this is the way God created the world; the story of the Bible tells us the way the world really is. There is no more fundamental way to speak about the nature of God's world than to speak of it in terms of a story. Nor is the biblical story to be understood simply as a local tale about a certain ethnic group or religion. It makes a comprehensive claim about the world: it is public truth. The biblical story encompasses all of reality—north, south, east, west, past, present, and future. It begins with the creation of all things and ends with the renewal of all things. In between it offers an interpretation of the meaning of cosmic history. It, therefore, makes a comprehensive claim; our stories, our reality must find a place in this story.⁵³

**Step 6: Understand the content.** The term **content** refers to the meaning of words or the subject matter of a written work. According to Fee and Stuart, it has to do with "the meanings of words, the grammatical relationships in sentences, and the choice of the original text where the manuscripts have variant readings. It also includes a number of the items [such as] the meaning of denarius, or a Sabbath day's journey, or 'high places,' etc."⁵⁴

> ***Content:*** **the meaning of words or passages; the subject matter of a written work.**

Sometimes the most fascinating insights come from understanding the robust meaning of the words Scripture uses. For example, the word often translated "peace" in the Old Testament is actually the Hebrew word *shalom*. But *shalom* means much more than the mere absence of conflict. Says Elmer Martens, professor emeritus of Old Testament, *shalom* "embraces concepts of harmony, security, serenity, right relationships, wholeness, health, prosperity, and even success. The term may refer to a condition or a relationship, and in the latter designates a right relationship to God."⁵⁵ In this instance, understanding the meaning of the word adds depth to the understanding of "peace" in the Old Testament.

> ***Bible Commentary:*** **a verse-by-verse exposition of scriptural passages written to help people better understand the Bible.**

One helpful tool in understanding both the context and the content of Scripture is a **Bible commentary**, a kind of book written by a theologian to help people better understand Scripture, passage by passage. Of commentaries, Fee and Stuart say,

> What you want a commentary for is basically to supply three things: (1) helps on sources and information about the historical context, (2) answers to those manifold content questions, and (3) thorough discussions of difficult texts as to the possibilities of meaning, along with the supporting arguments.⁵⁶

A good commentary digs into the theological issues rather than merely sharing the author's experiences, offering balanced discussions of several possible meanings of the text

<!-- page-182 -->

rather than proposing only what the author prefers. The best commentaries give insights into the cultures, specific points of interest regarding the Hebrew and Greek words used, and the historical background of the book.⁵⁷

**Step 7: Look for relationships.** Matthew 4:2–4 describes Jesus's being led into the wilderness and tempted by the Devil: "After fasting forty days and forty nights, he was hungry. And the tempter came and said to him, 'If you are the Son of God, command these stones to become loaves of bread.' But he answered, 'It is written, "Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that comes from the mouth of God."'" There is no way to understand this text without looking at the Old Testament passage Jesus was quoting: Deuteronomy 8, in which Moses gave instruction to the children of Israel in the wilderness. The parallels are stunning and worth several hours of careful study. Every verse is significant:

- Careful obedience to God's commandments precedes the possession of the Promised Land (v. 1).⁵⁸
- The time in the wilderness had been a test of the Israelites' hearts (v. 2).⁵⁹
- God fed the Israelites with manna so they would know that provision does not come from bread alone but from God's words (vv. 3–4).⁶⁰
- God disciplined the children of Israel in the wilderness to prepare them to hold fast to his commandments and not forget his provision when they entered the land of abundance (vv. 5–16).
- The temptation, Moses said, would be for the Israelites to say in their hearts, "My power and the might of my hand have gotten me this wealth" (vv. 17–18).⁶¹
- If the Israelites went after other gods and stopped listening to the voice of the Lord, they would perish (vv. 18–20).⁶²

By comparing and contrasting Jesus's forty days in the wilderness in Matthew 4 with the Israelites' forty years in the wilderness in Deuteronomy 8, we can see God's nature more clearly, making proper connections between passages and taking seriously how they relate to one another and illuminate one another in relationship. We might otherwise have seen Jesus's time in the wilderness as a random incident in his life.

> **The key is careful study of *all* Scripture, as well as study of the relationships that emerge between different texts.**

The key is careful study of *all* Scripture, as well as study of the relationships that emerge between different texts. We must be like those commended by the apostle Paul in Acts 17:11–12 who "received the word with all eagerness, examining the Scriptures daily to see if these things were so." The people in this passage, as Jews, were commended for comparing everything Paul was teaching to the words of the Old Testament.

<!-- page-183 -->

**Step 8: Study words.** Because the Bible is a unified whole, we might expect words and concepts to be woven throughout in the way individual threads weave throughout a tapestry to create a meaningful picture. And they are.

To get started with a word study, just type the word you're studying into a Bible program, note every verse where it occurs, and study the verses, in context, one by one. You might use a book that explains the words of Scripture, called a **lexicon**; you might also use a **theological dictionary** to develop a deeper understanding of each word and each use of each word.

> ***Lexicon:*** **an alphabetical dictionary that translates and defines words from another language, particularly Greek, Hebrew, and Latin.**

> ***Theological Dictionary:*** **a reference book of words and phrases found in the Bible.**

An example of a word study from the New Testament is the word *abundance*. The Greek word used in the original language is *perisseuo*. It means "to abound" or to have "a great deal of."⁶³ It's the word used in Mark 8:8⁶⁴ when the disciples, after feeding a great multitude through a miracle of Jesus, took up seven baskets full of pieces left over. It's also the word used in 2 Corinthians 9:8⁶⁵ when Paul talks about God's abundant provision for us through grace so we may be able to abound in every good work. Studying the word *abundance* helps us see God's focus on abundant grace in the New Testament, reminding us of God's focus on abundance in creation itself, with his command to be fruitful and multiply.

Words are important. Words have meaning. Examining how they are used in Scripture can fascinate us, but, moreover, word study opens us up to seeing God's consistently loving message throughout the ages.

**Step 9: Bring your experience to bear.** At first this advice seems to contradict our earlier principle about not imposing our own meanings and cultural assumptions on Scripture. But sometimes we are *invited* to do so by the Bible's use of examples from everyday life. When the psalmist tells us that he hides in the shadow of God's wings, people who know something about chickens are invited to picture the way a mother hen shelters her chicks in times of danger. When Hebrews 12 uses the figure of speech of an athletic competition to describe how we should act in view of the faith lived out by biblical characters, scriptural principles are here anchored in our everyday experiences. Similarly, when Paul in Ephesians 6:10–12⁶⁶ talks about the whole armor of God, we have a way to think about "spiritual soldiering" when we see military soldiers in action.

The use of metaphors and allusions enables us to understand Scripture more deeply and connect it to our human experiences. Our understanding does not change the meaning of the text, but seeing how God inspired the writers of Scripture to provide touch points for key concepts enables us to more deeply grasp its key principles.

**Step 10: Courageously pursue a response.** We are "to be doers of the word, and not hearers only" (James 1:22).⁶⁷ To hear God's Word and do nothing about it is to deceive ourselves into thinking we are free to do nothing.

However, not every passage in the biblical text is meant to be read as a command or point the reader must act upon. We may be admonished in sermons to "be a Ruth" or think

<!-- page-184 -->

of David's five smooth stones as the basis of a five-point outline, but this isn't really the best use of Scripture. Most of the Bible is *descriptive* in nature. It tells of past events, explores the lives of our ancestors (the good, the bad, and the ugly), and provides a record of God's active plan of redemption. A **descriptive passage** teaches us through inference and example, giving us a sense of where the people of God have been, so that we might discern our future more clearly.

> ***Descriptive Passage:*** **a biblical passage that describes specific events.**

For example, when the book of Nehemiah describes how Nehemiah studied the problem of the broken city walls of Jerusalem and rallied the people to fix them, we can gain insight into how a man committed to glorifying God was able to lead and how we might also be able to lead in difficult situations.

A **prescriptive passage**, on the other hand, provides specific hallmarks of how we *ought* to live, how we *ought* to make decisions, and how we *ought* to think. There are many "prescriptive passages" in the Bible, passages that reflect something of God's nature and the created order and, thus, form commands to be obeyed or values to be adopted:

> ***Prescriptive Passage:*** **a biblical passage that prescribes how people ought to live.**

- Exodus 20:2–17 (the Ten Commandments)
- Matthew 5:1–16 (the Sermon on the Mount)
- Matthew 28:16–20 (the Great Commission)

Prescriptive passages have a particular use in our being discipled to be more like Christ. Take, for example, this rich passage from the apostle Paul's letter to the church at Colossae:

> Put on then, as God's chosen ones, holy and beloved, compassionate hearts, kindness, humility, meekness, and patience, bearing with one another and, if one has a complaint against another, forgiving each other; as the Lord has forgiven you, so you also must forgive. And above all these put on love, which binds everything together in perfect harmony. And let the peace of Christ rule in your hearts, to which indeed you were called in one body. And be thankful. Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly, teaching and admonishing one another in all wisdom, singing psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, with thankfulness in your hearts to God. And whatever you do, in word or deed, do everything in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God the Father through him. (Col. 3:12–17)

This is clearly prescriptive: *do* this; *don't do* that. Both descriptive and prescriptive passages must be studied and learned from, but in different ways.

What kinds of specific actions should we pursue? I suggest three things, for starters:

<!-- page-185 -->

**First, journal what you are learning.** You can buy inexpensive paper journals at any discount store. It's great to get "off-line" for a bit and actually write things down. These chronicle our growth, and we can refer to our writing for the rest of our lives. Our past writing may even be of spiritual benefit to us in later years or to those who come after us.

> **Talk to people. "May I share with you something I learned from Scripture today? It would help me if I could talk about it aloud."**

**Second, share what you are learning.** Talk to people. "May I share with you something I learned from Scripture today? It would help me if I could talk about it aloud."

**Third, live what you are learning.** God's Word is powerful, and often he meets us with specific promptings about how we should live differently. In college, after reading a certain passage, I was particularly convicted about feeding the hungry. It was quite cold outside. I gathered up some food and old sweatshirts and headed out to an abandoned house a few blocks away where I suspected a homeless man lived. Inside I found the man quite uncomfortable in the cold. Because of an injury, he had not been able to make it to the warmth of the homeless shelter. He shivered under a pile of blankets. Because I had listened to the Spirit's prompting, I was able to help him find the aid he needed. I wish I could say I've always obeyed in this way. The apostle Paul seems to have felt the same way. Rather than chastising himself for past failures, though, he wrote, "Forgetting what lies behind and straining forward to what lies ahead, I press on toward the goal for the prize of the upward call of God in Christ Jesus" (Phil. 3:13–14).

The key is acting on what you know. Jesus said in John 13:17, "If you know these things, blessed are you if you do them." To not *do* them is to not *know* them.

## 7. Conclusion

I'd like to close this chapter with some thoughts about doubt. In chapter 1, I counseled you to "doubt your doubts." This applies in reading the Bible, too. Some people read Scripture and steadily increase in faith. Others read and grow doubtful: "How can this possibly be true?" If you've experienced doubt, you are not alone. Very godly people have doubts. John the Baptist—the forerunner of Jesus, a prophet of the Lord—even experienced doubt (Matt. 11:2–3).⁶⁸ Peter denied Christ three times. Thomas wouldn't believe that Jesus had risen until he placed his hands in Jesus's wounds.

> **Many people do not realize that the Reformation's most celebrated figure, a monk named Martin Luther, experienced grave doubts.**

Earlier we talked about the Protestant Reformation. Many people do not realize that the Reformation's most celebrated figure, a monk named Martin Luther, experienced grave doubts. Ten years after posting his Ninety-Five Theses on the church door at Wittenberg, Luther wrote of an agonizing experience of doubt: "For more than a week I was close to the gates of death and hell. I trembled in all my members. Christ was wholly

<!-- page-186 -->

lost. I was shaken by desperation and blasphemy of God."⁶⁹ Reflecting on the experience, Luther emphasized the importance of being anchored in truth in the middle of such experiences: "All this is written for our comfort that we should see how deeply God hides his face and how we must not go by our feeling but only by his Word."⁷⁰

When you experience doubt or have questions, don't bury them. Share them with a trusted pastor, teacher, or mentor. Find a trained theologian and take him or her out for coffee. And remember, the steadiest growth happens in the context of a church. God never intended for humans to grow up spiritually alone. The apostles speak frequently of spiritual growth in their letters. Almost all these letters were written to groups of people, not individuals. Spiritual growth takes place in community.

> **Remember this: God is shaping you into the image of his Son, a process more like the making of a painting than like the manufacturing of a machine.**

In the end, remember this: God is shaping you into the image of his Son, a process more like the making of a painting than like the manufacturing of a machine. John Ortberg vividly explains:

> God always knows what each person needs. He had Abraham take a walk, Elijah take a nap, Joshua take a lap, and Adam take the rap. He gave Moses a forty-year time out, he gave David a harp and a dance, and he gave Paul a pen and a scroll. He wrestled with Jacob, argued with Job, whispered to Elijah, warned Cain, and comforted Hagar. He gave Aaron an altar, Miriam a song, Gideon a fleece, Peter a name, and Elisha a mantle. Jesus was stern with the rich young ruler, tender with the woman caught in adultery, patient with the disciples, blistering with the scribes, gentle with the children, and gracious with the thief on the cross. God never grows two people the same way. God is a hand-crafter, not a mass-producer. And now it is your turn.⁷¹

It is your turn indeed. Start now. Pick up the Bible. Read it! As you do, you'll learn that the Bible carries many significant implications for our understanding of God and ourselves. We'll look at the implications of the Bible on our understanding of God in chapter 8 and the implications of the Bible on loving our neighbors in chapter 9.

## Endnotes

1. Jeremiah 29:11–13.
2. Luke 24:32.
3. Matthew 18:20.
4. John Micklethwait and Adrian Wooldridge, *God Is Back: How the Global Revival of Faith Is Changing the World* (New York: Penguin, 2009), 273–77.
5. Quoted in David Kinnaman, *You Lost Me: Why Young Christians Are Leaving Church … and Rethinking Faith* (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker, 2011), 215.
6. Elizabeth Eisenstein, *The Printing Revolution in Early Modern Europe* (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1983), 148.
7. See Philip Jenkins, *The Next Christendom: The Coming of Global Christianity* (New York: Oxford University Press, 2011).
8. Often attributed to Mark Twain.
9. Saint Augustine, *Confessions of St. Augustine* (Mineola, NY: Dover, 2002), 98.
10. Augustine, *Confessions*, 146.
11. N. T. Wright, *Simply Christian: Why Christianity Makes Sense* (New York: Harper-Collins, 2006), 191.
12. Glen Ward, *Postmodernism: Teach Yourself* (Chicago: McGraw-Hill, 2003), 162.
13. Jacques Derrida, a French philosopher and literary critic, even argued that because there is no meaning in a text, the reader's interpretation is more important than what the author intended. Kevin J. Vanhoozer, *Is There a Meaning in This Text? The Bible, the Reader, and the Morality of Literary Knowledge* (Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 1998), 158.
14. Occasionally, you'll hear Postmodernists use the term *anti-realism* to describe this skeptical approach to the so-called real world. For a more complete definition of anti-realism, see Robert Audi, ed., *The Cambridge Dictionary of Philosophy*, 2nd ed. (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1999), 33, which reads in part, "Realism, in one form or another form or area of inquiry, of realism, the view that there are knowable mind-independent facts, objects, or properties."
15. Postmodernists see the idea of a "metanarrative," a grand story explaining the whole world, as just a way to gain power and command others' obedience. Jean-François Lyotard urged his followers to free themselves from the grip of powerful people by exercising "incredulity towards metanarrative." To Lyotard, any broad explanations deserve skepticism because peoples' experiences are so varied and are all we really have to pay attention to. Jean-François Lyotard, *The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge* (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1984), xxiv.
16. Many Christian theologians are more comfortable with a postmodern approach to biblical studies than I am. They range from unabashedly enthusiastic to somewhat sympathetic in their embrace of Postmodernism. Some names you'll see along this spectrum of people who have embraced Postmodernism's assumptions or written approvingly about them include Brian McLaren, Stanley Grenz, Nancey Murphy, Roger Olson, Robert Webber, James K. A. Smith, and Merold Westphal. We need to be careful not to confuse their version of Postmodernism with that of atheistic thinkers such as Nietzsche, Derrida, Foucault, Lyotard, and Rorty. For a more "pro" postmodern view, see Merold Westphal, *Overcoming Onto-Theology: Toward a Postmodern Christian Faith*, Perspectives in Continental Philosophy 21 (New York: Fordham University Press, 2001), xi, and Roger E. Olson, "Post-Conservative Evangelical Theology and the Theological Pilgrimage of Clark Pinnock," in *Semper Reformandum: Studies in Honour of Clark H. Pinnock*, ed. Stanley E. Porter and Anthony R. Cross (Carlisle, PA: Paternoster, 2003), 20. For a more "con" view, see D. A. Carson, *Becoming Conversant with the Emerging Church: Understanding a Movement and Its Implications* (Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2005). Also, see Millard J. Erickson, Paul Kjoss Helseth, and Justin Taylor, eds., *Reclaiming the Center: Confronting Evangelical Accommodation in Postmodern Times* (Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2004).
17. Carson, *Becoming Conversant*, 123.
18. Wayne Grudem, *Systematic Theology: An Introduction to Biblical Doctrine* (Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 1994), 108.
19. Gordon D. Fee and Douglas Stuart, *How to Read the Bible for All Its Worth* (Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2003), 18.
20. Fee and Stuart, *How to Read the Bible*, 104.
21. Grudem, *Systematic Theology*, 50.
22. Graeme Goldsworthy, *Christ-Centered Biblical Theology: Hermeneutical Foundations and Principles* (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity, 2012), 59–60.
23. Fee and Stuart, *How to Read the Bible*, 17.
24. Fee and Stuart, *How to Read the Bible*, 17–18.
25. Gene C. Fant, *God as Author: A Biblical Approach to Narrative* (Nashville: B&H Academic, 2010), 32.
26. Robert Lewis Plummer, *40 Questions about Interpreting the Bible* (Grand Rapids, MI: Kregel, 2010), 96.
27. See Deuteronomy 17:6, 19:15; also the apostle Paul's use in 2 Corinthians 13:1 and 1 Timothy 5:19. The author of Hebrews also uses the term in Hebrews 10:28.
28. Fee and Stuart, *How to Read the Bible*, 21.
29. Fee and Stuart, *How to Read the Bible*, 21.
30. Timothy Keller, *Galatians for You: For Reading, for Feeding, for Leading. God's Word for You* (Purcellville, VA: The Good Book Company, 2013), 90.
31. Fee and Stuart, *How to Read the Bible*, 30.
32. Grudem, *Systematic Theology*, 108–9.
33. Fee and Stuart, *How to Read the Bible*, 26 (emphasis mine).
34. Wright, *Simply Christian*, 191.
35. Fant, *God as Author*, 140.
36. Fee and Stuart, *How to Read the Bible*, 17–18.
37. Michael C. D. Bauman, "The Ethics of Meaning," in *Pilgrim Theology: Core Doctrines for Christian Disciplines* (Manitou Springs, CO: Summit Press, 2007), 141.
38. Fee and Stuart, *How to Read the Bible*, 41–42.
39. You have probably noticed that I tend to use the English Standard Version (ESV) throughout this volume. The ESV updates and corrects the Revised Standard Version (RSV) and was translated by theologians such as Wayne Grudem and J. I. Packer, whom I know and trust.
40. Fee and Stuart, *How to Read the Bible*, 41–42.
41. Fee and Stuart, *How to Read the Bible*, 41–42.
42. Fee and Stuart, *How to Read the Bible*, 52.
43. Plummer, *40 Questions*, 118.
44. Goldsworthy, *Christ-Centered Biblical Theology*, 51.
45. Judges 11:39–40: "At the end of two months, she returned to her father, who did with her according to his vow that he had made. She had never known a man, and it became a custom in Israel that the daughters of Israel went year by year to lament the daughter of Jephthah the Gileadite four days in the year."
46. Fee and Stuart, *How to Read the Bible*, 26.
47. Fee and Stuart, *How to Read the Bible*, 27.
48. Paul T. Penley, *Reenacting the Way (of Jesus)* (Colorado Springs, CO: Re-enacting the Way, 2013), 22.
49. Penley, *Reenacting the Way*, 55.
50. Penley, *Reenacting the Way*, 55.
51. Fee and Stuart, *How to Read the Bible*, 27.
52. Fant, *God as Author*, 32.
53. Michael W. Goheen, "Reading the Bible as One Story," *Biblical Theology*, www.biblicaltheology.ca/blue_files/Reading%20the%20Bible%20as%20One%20Story.pdf.
54. Fee and Stuart, *How to Read the Bible*, 28.
55. Elmer A. Martens, *Believers Church Bible Commentary: Jeremiah* (Scottsdale, PA: Herald Press, 1986), 308.
56. Fee and Stuart, *How to Read the Bible*, 266.
57. Fee and Stuart, *How to Read the Bible*, 266–67.
58. Deuteronomy 8:1: "The whole commandment that I command you today you shall be careful to do, that you may live and multiply, and go in and possess the land that the LORD swore to give to your fathers."
59. Deuteronomy 8:2: "You shall remember the whole way that the LORD your God has led you these forty years in the wilderness, that he might humble you, testing you to know what was in your heart, whether you would keep his commandments or not."
60. Deuteronomy 8:3–4: "He humbled you and let you hunger and fed you with manna, which you did not know, nor did your fathers know, that he might make you know that man does not live by bread alone, but man lives by every word that comes from the mouth of the LORD. Your clothing did not wear out on you and your foot did not swell these forty years."
61. Deuteronomy 8:17–18: "Beware lest you say in your heart, 'My power and the might of my hand have gotten me this wealth.' You shall remember the LORD your God, for it is he who gives you power to get wealth, that he may confirm his covenant that he swore to your fathers, as it is this day."
62. Deuteronomy 8:18–20: "You shall remember the LORD your God, for it is he who gives you power to get wealth, that he may confirm his covenant that he swore to your fathers, as it is this day. And if you forget the LORD your God and go after other gods and serve them and worship them, I solemnly warn you today that you shall surely perish. Like the nations that the LORD makes to perish before you, so shall you perish, because you would not obey the voice of the LORD your God."
63. J. P. Louw and Eugene A. Nida, *Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament: Based on Semantic Domains*, 2nd ed., vol. 1 (New York: United Bible Societies, 1996), electronic edition, 599.
64. Mark 8:8: "They ate and were satisfied. And they took up the broken pieces left over, seven baskets full."
65. 2 Corinthians 9:8: "God is able to make all grace abound to you, so that having all sufficiency in all things at all times, you may abound in every good work."
66. Ephesians 6:10–12: "Be strong in the Lord and in the strength of his might. Put on the whole armor of God, that you may be able to stand against the schemes of the devil. For we do not wrestle against flesh and blood, but against the rulers, against the authorities, against the cosmic powers over this present darkness, against the spiritual forces of evil in the heavenly places."
67. James 1:22: "Be doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving yourselves."
68. Matthew 11:2–3: "When John heard in prison about the deeds of the Christ, he sent word by his disciples and said to him, 'Are you the one who is to come, or shall we look for another?'"
69. Quoted in Ruth A. Tucker, *Walking Away from Faith: Unraveling the Mystery of Belief and Unbelief* (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity, 2002), 91.
70. Quoted in Tucker, *Walking Away from Faith*, 91.
71. John Ortberg, quoted in Kinnaman, *You Lost Me*, 216–17.