<!-- page-191 -->

# Chapter 8

# What the Bible Says about Loving God

## 1. From Hopelessness to Hope

Christmas holiday songs can be trite and even silly, but one that has stood the test of time is Frank Sinatra's rendering

<!-- page-192 -->

of "I Heard the Bells on Christmas Day."¹ It was originally a poem by Henry Wadsworth Longfellow called "Christmas Bells."

> *I heard the bells on Christmas Day*
> *Their old, familiar carols play,*
>     *And wild and sweet*
>     *The words repeat*
> *Of peace on earth, good-will to men!*
>
> *And thought how, as the day had come,*
> *The belfries of all Christendom*
>     *Had rolled along*
>     *The unbroken song*
> *Of peace on earth, good-will to men!*

These verses reflect both a tender reminiscence and an awestruck realization that people all around the earth celebrate the birth of Christ. Just beneath these beautiful words, however, lies a story of a very broken man struggling to hold on to his belief in God and humanity.

"Christmas Bells" was composed Christmas morning, 1863, while Longfellow walked alone down a frosty street in Cambridge, Massachusetts. Not too long before, his second wife, Frances Appleton, had succumbed to injuries she suffered after her dress had caught on fire.²

> **Just beneath these beautiful words lies a story of a very broken man struggling to hold on to his belief in God and humanity.**

Longfellow had, years before, lost his first wife and his daughter. And now *this*?

But Longfellow's confusion wasn't just personal. The Northern and Southern armies were at that time locked in combat in a vicious Civil War. The nation Abraham Lincoln had called "the last best hope of earth" seemed daily to be dissolving into an era of unprecedented slaughter: neighbor against neighbor, brother against brother.

Utter loneliness. Hopelessness. The third verse of Sinatra's "I Heard the Bells on Christmas Day" or the sixth verse of the original "Christmas Bells" expresses Longfellow's sorrow:

> *And in despair I bowed my head;*
> *"There is no peace on earth," I said:*
>     *"For hate is strong,*
>     *And mocks the song*
> *Of peace on earth, good-will to men!"*

The temptation to hopelessness confronts every generation and every culture. A few years ago, the news reported that a famous diplomat, Richard Holbrooke, passed away after an unsuccessful surgery to repair a torn aorta. Holbrooke's last words were, "You've got to stop this war in Afghanistan."³ He died, literally and figuratively, of a broken heart. For decades he had traveled the world pleading for peace, yet on his deathbed, he found

<!-- page-193 -->

himself grappling with the awful recognition that peace is one thing human effort alone can never bring.

Yet we hope for—long for—things to be right-side up rather than upside down. We crave *shalom*. Psalm 78 counsels the people of Israel to teach God's principles to children "so that they should set their hope in God and not forget the works of God, but keep his commandments; and that they should not be like their fathers, a stubborn and rebellious generation, a generation whose heart was not steadfast, whose spirit was not faithful to God" (vv. 7–8).

> ***Shalom:*** **from the Hebrew for "peace, prosperity, and wellness"; implies harmony in creation and with one's neighbors as well as a right relationship with God.**

And not only should we have hope, but we should also proclaim it. First Peter 3:15 says "always" to be "prepared to make a defense to anyone who asks you for a reason for the hope that is in you." Our hope ought to turn heads, and we must be ready to explain its source.

In this way, Longfellow's final stanza is a shout of rescue to the despairing poet meandering down that wintry lane:

> *Then pealed the bells more loud and deep:*
> *"God is not dead; nor doth he sleep!*
>     *The Wrong shall fail,*
>     *The Right prevail,*
> *With peace on earth, good-will to men!"* ⁴

This is hope: that God is alive and awake; that he stepped into his own creation, entering the world stage as a helpless baby; that Immanuel, God with us, lived among us and willingly gave himself over to death on the cross, paying the penalty for our sin; that he was resurrected, overcoming death; and that he promises life of the ages to all with ears to hear.

Longfellow's poem expresses the sorrow of a fallen world but also the metamorphosis of *shalom*: the repairing, rebuilding, renewing, and refreshing of the relationships that so violently ruptured in the fall. God's redemption brings restoration and reconciliation—to God, self, others, and the creation. This is the most significant development in human history, as Richard John Neuhaus eloquently expresses:

> We have not the right to despair, for despair is a sin. And finally we have not the reason to despair, quite simply because Christ has risen. And this is the strength of a Christian world view, the strength of the Christian way of telling the story of the world: it has no illusions about it. All the other stories are built upon delusions, vain dreams, and utopias.⁵

In this chapter, we'll look at "you and God" to ask what it means to be image bearers of God in a created, fallen, and redeemed world. We'll talk openly about the nature of sin and idolatry and explore what it means to live righteously, wisely, lovingly, and mercifully as God's image bearers in an age of redemption. In the following chapter, we'll look at "you and the world" to see the implications of the Bible's metanarrative for how our loving God transforms

<!-- page-194 -->

our relationships with those around us. Let's begin with a brief review of who God is and what it means that we bear his image.

## 2. Who Is God?

As we saw in our study of the biblical metanarrative, there are two most common names for God in the language of God's covenant people:

- **Elohim** ("God") is a generic designation for "deity" or "powerful" and focuses on God as the creator of the whole world.
- **Yahweh** ("I Am Who I Am") is the personal and covenantal name of Israel's God. Preeminently, he is the God who redeemed his people from Egypt and brought them into covenant relationship with himself. Translators usually render Yahweh as "the LORD," which, while accurate, does not capture for most readers God's deeply personal nature.

> ***Elohim:*** **from the Hebrew for "deity"; the generic name used in the Old Testament for the creator-God.**

> ***Yahweh:*** **from the Hebrew for "I Am"; the personal and covenantal name of God used in the Old Testament.**

In Genesis 1, God is referred to as *Elohim*, the great creator of the world. The narrative that describes his creative work is a doxology, a hymn of praise to the only one powerful enough to form and fill the entire universe. In Genesis 2:4, God is introduced with both names as *Yahweh Elohim* ("the 'I Am Who I Am' Lord God"). Together, these two titles showcase God as both the awesome creator and the loving redeemer who is Israel's covenant God.

> **We have seen that no aspect of his character takes second place to any other aspect. For example, God doesn't cease to be loving when he judges sin.**

We have also seen in our study that God reveals many of his attributes to his human creation. For example, God is holy (set apart), eternal (has always existed), omniscient (all-knowing), omnipotent (all-powerful), omnipresent (everywhere present), and unchanging. God is also righteous (always just in his decisions), loving (the perfect expression of self-giving), wise (generates no unintended consequences), and merciful (gives us what we don't deserve). God doesn't *become* these things by doing them; he *embodies* them. Further, we have seen that no aspect of his character takes second place to any other aspect. For example, God doesn't cease to be loving when he judges sin.

These attributes give us insight into how God designed us, how we humans are affected by the fall, and how we are being redeemed in our image-bearing capacity.

## 3. Who Are We?

Christians believe in an identifiable human nature. We are embodied persons, made to bear the image of a personal God. The properties most important to our personhood are

<!-- page-195 -->

shared with him.⁶ We are composed of immaterial entities: soul, spirit, mind, heart, will, consciousness, and intuition.⁷ Our bodies maintain their identifiable form, but our identity, our consciousness, continues undisrupted.⁸

Possessing both bodies and souls, we humans exist and are sentient beings (that is, we are aware of our existence).⁹ Humans are, by our nature, religious. We sense that there is "something more" to the universe. We intuitively know that somehow our lives are lived in response to that greater reality.

Of course, many people claim not to be religious. Some further claim that their nonreligious state is actually the true, natural state of human beings, as if somehow religious people are defective or, as the criticism often goes, delusional. One such group calls themselves "Brights," implying that those who disagree are dull.¹⁰ But the evidence is not that humans are nonreligious by nature. In fact, it is the opposite. University of Notre Dame sociologist Christian Smith has studied the religious nature of humans and concluded that the nonreligious have deactivated a natural tendency in transferring the object of their worship to knowledge, possessions, or themselves:

> This not only helps to explain religion's primordial, irrepressible, widespread, and seemingly inextinguishable character in the human experience, it also suggests that the skeptical Enlightenment, secular humanist, and New Atheist visions for a totally secular human world are simply not realistic—they are cutting against a very strong grain in the nature of reality's structure and so will fail to achieve their purpose. But that is not the whole story. Taking the concept of "being religious by nature" in a properly critical sense also helps us interpret the data that tells us that human beings and societies often are not religious. This view tells us that nonreligious people possess the natural capacities and tendencies toward religion but that those capacities and tendencies have not been activated by environmental, experiential triggers or else have been activated but then neutralized or deactivated by some other social forces.¹¹

Of course, in order to have a religious nature, we must have a human nature first. It cannot be, as Postmodernism insists, that humans do not have an identifiable nature or essence, a "singular and unique 'I.'"¹² If Postmodernism is true, we might be subjects, bodies, or units, but we are not beings or persons. There is only an ever-evolving, highly sexual, social animal with multiple subjective interests crying out for recognition and acceptance.¹³ We are like onions: when you're done peeling away the layers of culture, nothing remains.

Not everyone thinks Postmodernism has it all figured out. In his textbook on Postmodernism, Glenn Ward points out that the highly respected philosopher Jürgen Habermas, for one, "disputes the claims of some postmodern thinkers that human identity is unstable, fragmented, or 'in process.'… For him we all, deep down, share eternal human needs and desires. The failure of the Postmodernists is that they refuse to propose a route towards the fulfillment of these."¹⁴

We sense that we have an enduring nature because we actually do, the biblical account insists. Rather than being like onions, we are more like peaches with a hard seed in the middle.

<!-- page-196 -->

God made us in his image and fashioned us for his glory. Let's take a look at what image bearing means, how the fall affected it, and how God redeems it.

## 4. Image Bearing: Created

As we saw in earlier chapters, image was a very important concept in the ancient Near Eastern culture in which the Bible was written. Kings set up images of themselves in conquered cities to remind people who was in charge. An image symbolized authority over a certain domain.

But when God decided to set up his image, he didn't do it by carving statues; he formed living, breathing humans. God did not merely want his creation to acknowledge his sovereignty; he wanted his creation to reflect it by living with purpose, trust, confidence, decisiveness, creativity, and responsibility.

> **When God decided to set up his image, he didn't do it by carving statues; he formed living, breathing humans. God did not merely want his creation to acknowledge his sovereignty; he wanted his creation to reflect it by living with purpose, trust, confidence, decisiveness, creativity, and responsibility.**

We see this in Genesis 2:18, when God announced, "It is not good that the man should be alone; I will make him a helper fit for him." He then created the animals and brought them to the man so he could name them. After the animals were named, the man was led to realize that none of the creatures was the complete kind of helper he needed. He needed a helper with whom he could walk and share love, someone who would help him accomplish his massive mission.

Even before God created woman, though, we can see how having lots of animals to take care of helped Adam, deepening his appreciation for God's creativity, expanding his awareness of nature, and, most important, helping him grow in responsibility. With every act of naming, Adam became more like the thoughtful, whimsical, hardworking, proactive, artistic, "can-do," responsibility-taking, abundance-minded God in whose image he was made.

Giving us jobs to do—*very big* jobs—is one way God shapes us into his image. But what exactly does it mean to bear God's image? If, as the Bible teaches, we are fallen creatures, does humanity resemble God *less* today than we resembled him before the fall? Or do Christians perhaps bear God's image differently than those who remain in rebellion against him? These are important and difficult questions about God's image in us. Over time, three different views of the *imago Dei* have emerged:

- **Resemblance.** The most popular view says we are "like God" with respect to certain attributes such as intelligence, rationality, emotions, free will, morality, and ability to communicate. Because this view focuses on "how we are" (our being or nature) instead of "what we do" (our function), it's called an *ontological* view.
- **Relationship.** This view expands on the idea of resemblance, saying we are like God by our being relational. We relate to God and one another. In our relational capacity, we can even relate to false gods—to idols.

<!-- page-197 -->

- **Rule.** Some connect their understanding of "image of God" to his commanding humanity to rule and have dominion over the rest of creation (Gen. 1:28).¹⁵ This view, which as opposed to our *being* is focused on our *function*, gains strength when we remember that in ancient Near East literature, "image" and "likeness" signified one's rule, one's function. In this sense, humans are fully images of God even after the fall. We all bear God's image equally, and we do this uniquely as humans.

These are three very different views, but Old Testament professor Kenneth Turner thinks they can be synthesized.¹⁶ Perhaps we are "like God" in our function as rulers on the earth, but we also possess the God-given tools needed to carry out that function, such as intelligence, ability to communicate, and so forth. Even in our fallen state, we are able to use these tools, however imperfectly, to carry out our mission and relate to one another and even to God. Humans were created to bear God's image, and all do, even when only faint traces of the family resemblance persist.

## 5. Image Bearing: Fallen

The **doctrine of the fall** teaches us that things are not as God originally intended. As we saw while examining the biblical metanarrative, our first parents tried to slough off their image-bearing capacity but found underneath only nakedness and shame, not the shiny skin of wisdom they'd hoped for. Irresponsibility, paranoia, and blame replaced responsibility, trust, and purpose. God then pronounced a curse on the serpent, the woman, and the man.

> ***Doctrine of the Fall:*** **the orthodox Christian belief that sin entered the natural world when Adam and Eve chose to disobey God and ate from the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil.**

A God who curses people forever because they ate some fruit fits the Secularist portrayal of God as a mean-spirited judge whose punishments do not fit the crime. But this stereotype misrepresented what really happened. The curse was not God saying, "I'm angry, so I'm going to ruin your lives!" Rather, it was the man and woman calling down upon themselves the natural consequences of their actions. They said, in essence, "We can handle it from here. Leave us alone." Without God's presence, what once had been pleasurable became painful. Without God's touch, what once had been obedient became rebellious. Without God's wisdom, what once had been fruitful became barren. God's constant presence does not merely comfort us pleasantly but also holds everything together; the garment of nature, however, by our rebellion, unravels at the seams. It's easier to see this if we understand sin's nature and how it affects human nature. Let's examine that next.

> ***Parasite:*** **an organism that survives at the expense of a host (for example, viruses, bacteria, tapeworms, flukes, fleas, ticks, and louses).**

## 6. What Sin Does to Us

As professor emeritus of religion Albert Wolters explains, sin is like a parasite on human nature.¹⁷ *Parasite*

<!-- page-198 -->

is the generic name for any organism that survives at the expense of the host. Viruses and bacteria are parasites, for example, as are tapeworms, flukes, fleas, ticks, and louses. They survive only by living off a life-generating host organism.

In other words, parasites can survive only if the host organism off which they are surviving is really alive—if it contains a high degree of order, is responsive to stimuli, maintains stable internal conditions, can acquire the energy it needs to stay alive, grows, reproduces, and changes through time without changing its basic genetic characteristics.¹⁸ Most parasites do not kill their host, at least not right away. Tapeworms don't kill your dog, at least directly; they just steal the nutrients your dog needs to sustain life.

Here's what we know about parasites:

- Everyone is at risk. Parasites are everywhere in the environment and are difficult to avoid.
- Parasites are opportunistic. They thrive in sick bodies.
- Parasites are often difficult to detect.
- It is difficult to get rid of parasites.¹⁹

Sin is like this. It is parasitical. Take lying, for example. Lying couldn't exist unless we humans had the capacity to tell the truth. When we distort this truth-telling capacity to mislead others, to get them to believe that what is *not* actually true is in fact the way things really are, we have invited a parasite into our lives. Our relationship with others is broken. Not only do our words invite skepticism if we are discovered to have lied, but our natures are such that we assume that others are lying to us just as we are to them. The parasite of lying continues to eat away at both truth and relationship.

## 7. What We Can Do about Sin

So what do we do about sin? When a creature is afflicted with parasites, the goal is to remove them, not to kill the host. If the host is unhealthy, restoring it to health must be part of the prescription. To do this with the parasite of sin, though, we must know something of the state to which we wish to restore people.²⁰ This means first seeking a clear picture of physical and spiritual health.

If we consider health from only a physical point of view, we'll miss very important insights about how to be truly healthy. We might look at a physically vibrant twentysomething and see only a picture of health, or we might believe that an elderly person, stooped and wheelchair bound, is merely a product of time and gravity. But if we are more than our bodies—if we are something soulish, mindful, and spirited—then what from the body's perspective appears to be healthy could actually be an advanced state of decay, and what appears to be the cruelty of aging sin, but it is fair to say that all views agree on this one thing: sin diminishes or covers up the *imago Dei*, but it doesn't kill it. We may be fallen image bearers, but we never stop being image bearers.

<!-- page-199 -->

To really restore people to health, we must know about the spiritual parasites afflicting us all. The most vicious parasite, because it goes directly to the heart of humanity's bearing of God's image, is idolatry.

## 8. Idolatry: Attacking God's Image

Without a sense of who God is, we can never grasp what true health looks like. The Bible has a word for anything that diverts us from perceiving God clearly: *idolatry*. Idolatry is so much more than making graven images. If that's all it was, we would probably be off the hook. Most of us don't make carvings and worship them. But when it comes to wrong ideas about God, none of us is off the hook. A. W. Tozer explains:

> The essence of idolatry is the entertainment of thoughts about God that are unworthy of Him. It begins in the mind and may be present where no overt act of worship has taken place.… Wrong ideas about God are not only the fountain from which the polluted waters of idolatry flow; they are themselves idolatrous. The idolater simply imagines things about God and acts as if they were true.²¹

Bizarrely, this is what happened after God led the children of Israel out of Egypt. While Moses received the Ten Commandments, his brother Aaron fashioned a golden calf and other idols and announced, "These are your gods, O Israel, who brought you up out of the land of Egypt!" (Exod. 32:4). A *golden calf* had brought them out of Egypt? How had they become so stupid this quickly?

### You Become What You Worship

We might think we are superior to a tribe of refugees who danced around a golden calf, but we share with those ancient Israelites the same core problem. In our fear and arrogance, we construct things to worship only to end up resembling the idols we have created. This is one of the direst consequences of idolatry, according to Psalm 135. Not only do idols steal the worship of which God alone is worthy but they actually transmute the worshipper into the image of what is being worshipped:

> The idols of the nations are silver and gold, the work of human hands. They have mouths, but do not speak; they have eyes, but do not see; they have ears, but do not hear, nor is there any breath in their mouths. Those who make them become like them, so do all who trust in them. (vv. 15–18)

So when we idolize any part of the created world, we take on its attributes and in a sense "become" what we worship. If we worship things rather than the creator, we end up becoming like things: we can't see or hear or think about what is true, and we begin seeing others as objects to be used for our own benefit rather than as image bearers of God.

> **So when we idolize any part of the created world, we take on its attributes and in a sense "become" what we worship. If we worship things rather than the creator, we end up becoming like things: we can't see or hear or think about what is true, and we begin seeing others as objects to be used for our own benefit rather than as image bearers of God.**

<!-- page-200 -->

If God had not made us living, breathing representations of his authority, we might occasionally worship the created thing rather than the creator. But God's image is at the heart of everything, as even the Old Testament law in Leviticus reflects: the two things that called for the death penalty were crimes against God's covenant, and crimes that distort his image, as in, say, graven images or abuse or murder of people. If the Creator actually exists, worshipping the created thing rather than the Creator is absurd, like believing that the football itself—rather than football players—scores winning touchdowns.

Not only is it absurd to replace life-giving persons with lifeless objects, but it is also offensive. Imagine how ripped off you would feel to tour the world-famous San Diego Zoo and find that the animals had been replaced with inanimate models. Similarly, trying to off-load our image-bearing capacity onto lifeless objects is to rip off God. It would be like knocking out a priceless Chagall stained-glass window to put up a bedsheet or trading the Hope Diamond for Mardi Gras beads.

Still, in this sense, we all have much in common with the children of Israel, who traded the presence of almighty God for a golden calf, and with Judas, who traded the life of his friend and teacher for thirty pieces of silver. People make these kinds of bad trades all the time: trading a lifelong marriage for a night with a prostitute, or a God-given talent for a shaky crack high, or a deep friendship for the pleasure of a snarky social media post. We become shallow, unstable, unthinking, and uncaring, just like the things we worship.

What can save us from our moldy, withered, shuffling, drooling imitation of God's goodness? Only one thing.

### The More We Understand God, the Less We Will Worship Ourselves

We are rescued from idolatry only by understanding once again who God is. When we encounter him, we see what our nature without him is like. He is holy and we are not. Moses and Isaiah were two men who saw God. Both were pretty good guys trying to do what God wanted, yet their first reaction to their sin was being overcome with a renewed sense of its seriousness. Let's take a look at each.

"Please show me your glory," Moses asked God. The narrative then reads as follows:

> He said, "I will make all my goodness pass before you and will proclaim before you my name 'The LORD.' And I will be gracious to whom I will be gracious, and will show mercy on whom I will show mercy. But," he said, "you cannot see my face, for man shall not see me and live." And the LORD said, "Behold, there is a place by me where you shall stand on the rock, and while my glory passes by I will put you in a cleft of the rock, and I will cover you with my hand until I have passed by. Then I will take away my hand, and you shall see my back, but my face shall not be seen." (Exod. 33:19–23)

So God in all his goodness passed before Moses, proclaiming the full meaning of his name, the Lord:

<!-- page-201 -->

> The LORD, the LORD, a God merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and abounding in steadfast love and faithfulness, keeping steadfast love for thousands, forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin, but who will by no means clear the guilty, visiting the iniquity of the fathers on the children and the children's children, to the third and the fourth generation. (34:6–7)

Moses, out of reflex, hit the deck: "And Moses quickly bowed his head toward the earth and worshipped. And he said, 'If now I have found favor in your sight, O Lord, please let the Lord go in the midst of us, for it is a stiff-necked people, and pardon our iniquity and our sin, and take us for your inheritance'" (vv. 8–9). In experiencing the full goodness of the Lord, Moses grasped that his own sin—not just the sin of his people—was also the problem.

For the second example, we fast-forward a few hundred years to Jerusalem just prior to the exile of the tribe of Judah. The prophet Isaiah, in Isaiah 6:1–4, vividly describes a vision:

> In the year that King Uzziah died I saw the Lord sitting upon a throne, high and lifted up; and the train of his robe filled the temple. Above him stood the seraphim. Each had six wings: with two he covered his face, and with two he covered his feet, and with two he flew. And one called to another and said: "Holy, holy, holy is the LORD of hosts; the whole earth is full of his glory!" And the foundations of the thresholds shook at the voice of him who called, and the house was filled with smoke.

Isaiah reacted similarly to Moses: "Woe is me! For I am lost; for I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips; for my eyes have seen the King, the LORD of hosts!" (v. 5). In the light of God's glory, Isaiah saw himself as an unclean man leading an unclean people.

> **Only in the all-seeing light of God's glory do we see ourselves correctly. We realize how ridiculous it is to worship ourselves or other people or things. God's glory points with laser-like precision, revealing our hidden idols of self-doubt and low expectations as nothing more than masked pride.**

Only in the all-seeing light of God's glory do we see ourselves correctly. We realize how ridiculous it is to worship ourselves or other people or things. God's glory points with laser-like precision, revealing our hidden idols of self-doubt and low expectations as nothing more than masked pride. God's glory instantly scours away any illusion that we are superior to anyone else. The white-hot hum of God's glory also ignites within us a burning determination to declare war against *anything* standing in the way of fully bearing the image of the always-good, always-merciful, and always-faithful God.

God's glory reveals how fallen our condition is, like the examining room light that fully exposes all the damage done by the parasites that have tried to destroy us. God does not merely try to make the best of a bad situation; he is a redeemer at war with anything that wars against his image bearers.

<!-- page-202 -->

## 9. Image Bearing: Redeemed

Romans 8:29 says, "Those whom he foreknew he also predestined to be conformed to the image of his Son." Beneath the theological debate over the doctrine of predestination, a deeper point reveals itself: what it means to be conformed to the image of Jesus. God aims to restore us to the place where we can bear his image righteously, wisely, lovingly, and mercifully. In each of these four communicable attributes of God, we can discern how we ought to live in light of Christ's redemption.

### *Righteousness*

The first of the four communicable attributes we will explore is **righteousness**, which means for us humans a strong personal desire to understand and embody the character of Christ.

> ***Righteousness:*** **the quality of being morally and spiritually right with God.**

**Understand your identity in Christ.** A person's **identity** is the set of characteristics, gifting, and convictions that make him "who" he is. One's identity develops through time and experience. Psychologist James E. Marcia, based on the work of psychologist Erik Erikson, developed a series of tests to examine Erikson's thought about how young adults form a sense of identity.²² He found that people go through four phases as their sense of identity develops:

> ***Identity:*** **the set of characteristics, giftings, and convictions that uniquely define who a person is.**

- **Identity Diffusion:** Diffusion is when people flounder but are unconcerned about it. They have not yet arrived at their purpose in life or understood who they are. They have no answers and few, if any, questions.
- **Identity Foreclosure:** Foreclosure is when people embrace a certain identity by ignoring any questions or thoughts that might challenge it. Usually they just follow the dictates of those in authority over them. They might have answers, but they have not questioned them.
- **Identity Moratorium:** Moratorium is a full-blown identity crisis. People in this stage struggle, concerning themselves with finding answers to unanswered questions.
- **Identity Achievement:** When a person has a stable sense of identity—committed to certain goals, beliefs, and values—that person has reached identity achievement. He has asked the right questions and has settled on answers.

Some people never make it out of phase one, *diffusion*. Their own identities are so poorly developed that they find themselves unable to know God or care about spiritual things and life purpose. Others make it into the second phase, *foreclosure*, because they were raised in families that made clear the values they ought to embrace but may find themselves dangerously

<!-- page-203 -->

relying on too much certainty or too much doubt, and rather than *actually* knowing, they only *think* they know.

The third phase, *moratorium*, is common in our culture among college students. Their beliefs have been challenged by new views and information, and they don't know what to do. They're struggling. The fourth phase, *achievement*, is the most stable place to be. Having wrestled with the difficult issues and having emerged with a sense of identity and purpose, a person in this phase is more prepared to move confidently into the next season of life.

> **From a biblical perspective, we can never really know ourselves properly without first knowing God through Jesus Christ.**

From a biblical perspective, we can never really know ourselves properly without first knowing God through Jesus Christ. In the gospel of Matthew, we see an example of one of the disciples, Peter, being moved to identity achievement through acknowledging God through Christ. It took place in the district of Caesarea Philippi, which was a center of both religious and political worship.

> Now when Jesus came into the district of Caesarea Philippi, he asked his disciples, "Who do people say that the Son of Man is?" And they said, "Some say John the Baptist, others say Elijah, and others Jeremiah or one of the prophets." He said to them, "But who do you say that I am?" Simon Peter replied, "You are the Christ, the Son of the living God." And Jesus answered him, "Blessed are you, Simon Bar-Jonah! For flesh and blood has not revealed this to you, but my Father who is in heaven. And I tell you, you are Peter, and on this rock I will build my church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. I will give you the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and whatever you bind on earth shall be bound in heaven, and whatever you loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven." (16:13–19)

Notice how Simon's identifying of the established work of Christ is nested in Christ's establishment of Simon's identity. By renaming Simon "Peter," which means "rock," Jesus takes what from a human standpoint would be an offense—"You're as dumb as a rock"—and transforms it into a picture of strength, steadfast to the point where not even the gates of hell can dislodge what God is accomplishing.

> **The New Testament is full of passages that describe what it would mean to trust Christ with your identity.**

Peter's identity achievement did not make him perfect. It did not place him beyond the reach of doubt. In fact, during Jesus's trial, Peter denied even knowing him. But when restored by Jesus, Peter learned to "doubt his doubts." He became a man on a death-defying mission to proclaim the gospel.

The New Testament is full of passages that describe what it would mean to trust Christ with your identity:

- You have the right to be a child of God (John 1:12).²³
- By abiding in Christ, you will bear much fruit (John 15:5).²⁴

<!-- page-204 -->

- You are free from spiritual condemnation (Rom. 8:1).²⁵
- You are heirs with Christ of whatever God has to give (Rom. 8:16–17).²⁶
- You are one spirit with Christ (1 Cor. 6:17).²⁷
- You are able to glorify God in your body (1 Cor. 6:19–20).²⁸
- You are a new creation (2 Cor. 5:17).²⁹
- You have become God's kind of righteous (2 Cor. 5:21).³⁰
- Christ lives in you (Gal. 2:20).³¹
- You have been blessed with every spiritual blessing (Eph. 1:3).³²
- You are holy and blameless before God (Eph. 1:4).³³
- You are rooted in Christ and built up in him (Col. 2:7).³⁴
- You have been filled with Christ in whom all authority resides (Col. 2:10).³⁵
- You need not fear, as you have the capacity for power, love, and self-control (2 Tim. 1:7).³⁶
- You are a recipient of mercy and grace when you need it (Heb. 4:16).³⁷
- You have escaped the bondage to corruption that comes through sinful desire (2 Pet. 1:4).³⁸
- The evil one cannot touch you (1 John 5:18).³⁹

**Repent and be restored.** The Scriptures reveal how Christ's righteousness is available to operate in us. For most, though, such promises are abstractions they have not personally experienced. At Summit Ministries, we once surveyed students from our leadership conferences. Even among committed Christians, before they attended the program, only one-third reported feeling close to God. Something stood in the way of a close relationship with their Creator.⁴⁰

> ***Repentance:*** **from the Greek for "changing one's mind"; the process of reviewing, regretting, and then changing direction with one's thoughts and actions.**

God has a way of knocking down the barrier to spiritual victory. It is called **repentance**. The New Testament word for "repentance" is the Greek word *metanoia*, which means "changing one's mind." The word *metanoia* was often used in a philosophical sense, referring to changing one's mind-set: rejecting an inferior way of life and setting off on the path of enlightenment. This kind of change comes only from a radical shift to a far-superior way of life. As pastor Tim Keller has said, "Fear-based

<!-- page-205 -->

repentance makes us hate ourselves. Joy-based repentance makes us hate the sin."⁴¹ According to Scripture, God's kindness leads us to repentance of the right sort (Rom. 2:4).⁴²

Repentance almost never takes place on our own. The Holy Spirit leads us to repentance by what Proverbs 27:6 calls "the wounds of a friend." We need accountability, someone who will confront us with our sin, someone in whom we can confide. In fact, for much of church history, repentance was part of the public act of worship. Because sin is not merely a private act but has public implications, repentance ought also be done, at least in part, in a public manner.

The Book of Common Prayer, for example, offers a beautiful and humbling prayer of repentance that would be a good model for anyone who wants to be restored to right relationship with God:

> Almighty and most merciful Father; We have erred, and strayed from Thy ways like lost sheep. We have followed too much the devices and desires of our own hearts. We have offended against Thy holy laws. We have left undone those things which we ought to have done; And we have done those things which we ought not to have done; And there is no health in us. But Thou, O Lord, have mercy upon us, miserable offenders. Spare Thou those, O God, who confess their faults. Restore Thou those who are penitent; According to Thy promises declared unto mankind in Christ Jesus our Lord. And grant, O most merciful Father, for His sake; That we may hereafter live a godly, righteous, and sober life, To the glory of Thy holy Name. Amen.⁴³

For Anglicans, this prayer is usually said at home in the morning, when the members of a household have not had many opportunities to commit sins! It reminds us that sin is a *state of being*, not just a *set of actions*, and it causes us to humbly rely on God's grace to remove sin's parasite and restore the joy of *shalom*.

**Develop a proper view of sin: structure and direction.** A second part of having our identity in Christ is having a proper view of sin. Sin does not morph us into genetic mutants incapable of bearing God's image. Rather, as we saw earlier, sin is a parasite that sucks away vital nutrients and grows itself at the expense of a healthy body. With each aspect of creation, we must think of both the "structure" of creation and the "direction" we move. Sin does not destroy the structure but hijacks it to wrong purposes.⁴⁴

> **With each aspect of creation, we must think of both the "structure" of creation and the "direction" we move. Sin does not destroy the structure but hijacks it to wrong purposes.**

Take, for example, the idea of "ambition." Many Christians think ambition is sinful in structure. They believe that it is never right to purposefully try to get the things we want. For support of their position, they turn to Scripture.⁴⁵ But the Bible condemns *selfish ambition*, not *ambition* itself. Ambition is not the problem; the problem is ambition put to selfish uses. The structure of ambition is fine, but its *direction* is often corrupted.

In our redeemed image bearing, for example, we might even think of ambition as a virtue that can be used to spread the gospel. The apostle Paul says in Romans

<!-- page-206 -->

15:20, "I make it my ambition to preach the gospel, not where Christ has already been named, lest I build on someone else's foundation." He seemed to think that ambition was good when it came to spreading the gospel. The difference between fallen image bearing and redeemed image bearing is the use to which ambition is put.

> **If the structure of creation is still good but we humans hijack it and take it in the wrong direction, discerning the *right* direction is part of redemptive image bearing.**

We can approach each of the "seven deadly sins"—wrath, greed, sloth, pride, lust, envy, and gluttony—in a similar way. Wrath takes the structure of righteousness and moves in the direction of self-righteousness. Sloth takes the structure of contentment and turns it into laziness. Pride takes the confidence we feel knowing we bear God's image and turns it toward self-worship. Lust distorts the goodness of intimacy. Envy takes the structure of protectiveness and turns it into obsessiveness. Gluttony abuses the goodness of enjoyment.

If the structure of creation is still good but we humans hijack it and take it in the wrong direction, discerning the *right* direction is part of redemptive image bearing. This skill in discerning the right direction from the many competing alternatives is called *wisdom*.

### *Wisdom*

A second communicable attribute of God, **wisdom**, does not come from how we think or feel but rather by how we act. As philosopher Mortimer Adler puts it, "We have seen artistic skill and scientific knowledge put to evil use. But we do not ordinarily think a man wise unless he acts wisely. To act wisely is to act well, even as to have wisdom is to use it."⁴⁶

> ***Wisdom:*** **the ability of thinking and acting with good judgment.**

In ancient times, there were two very different concepts of wisdom and they were not equally good. The first concept of wisdom was that it is an otherworldly state that one can reach only by detaching from the things of this world. Plato (428–348 BC), for example, saw wisdom as an unattainable form about which we could know enough to want and love it.⁴⁷ Alcinous, a pagan philosopher of the second-century AD who followed Plato in claiming that God is "eternal, ineffable, self-sufficient, without need … and perfect in every respect," taught that the only way to know such a God was to ascend from earthly things to higher realities:

> First one contemplates the beauty found in bodies, after this one passes on to the beauty of the soul, then to the beauty in customs and laws, then to the vast ocean of beauty; after this one conceives of the good itself … which appears as light and shines on the soul as it makes its ascent. Then one comes to the idea of God because of his preeminence in honor.⁴⁸

The Greek philosopher Lucretius (99–55 BC) agreed. He thought absorbing the teachings of the wise separated people from the striving masses so they could live a life free from pain, fear, or struggle.⁴⁹ Plotinus (AD 205–270) concurred but added an intellectual

<!-- page-207 -->

component—that wisdom is the state of rest or repose that comes from having reasoned your way to a satisfactory solution.⁵⁰

The second type of wisdom, the Hebrew conception, rejected the idea that wisdom was an otherworldly state attained through restful repose. The Hebrews were focused instead on making good decisions in everyday circumstances. In Hebrew, the dominant word for "wisdom" is *chokmah*, which means "skill in living."⁵¹ Although the Greeks thought that wisdom appeared in party clothes and looked a lot like leisure, the Hebrews thought it appeared in overalls and looked a lot like work.

Early Christians, drawing from the Jewish heritage of their faith, embraced the Hebrew rather than the Greek concept of wisdom. While the Romans stayed true to the Greek tradition of trying to perfect their own images, Christians focused on becoming like Christ. Such a life featured feasts and physical gatherings, and it involved healing sick people and the poor. It was very earthy. This Christian focus on the here and now so concerned the Romans that some of their writers called Christians atheists! Author and minister Peter J. Leithart explains, "Instead of ascending past sensible things to the intellectual realm, Christians said that God had made Himself known in flesh, and continues to give Himself in water and wine, bodies and bread. Christians were so earthly-minded that they could be no heavenly good."⁵²

The phrase "so earthly-minded they could be no heavenly good" is the opposite of what many Christians today are accused of being, but it is the redeemed response to Scripture. If the one who established and maintains the moral order is a *person*, then wisdom is not just a fanciful guide to better manners or winning the praise of others; it is the key to understanding the very best ways for people to live well with nature, one another, and God. It is true both now and for all eternity.

So how does one acquire wisdom? Fortunately, advanced age is not a precondition. Proverbs 10:1 says, "A wise son makes a glad father." Proverbs 13:1 says, "A wise son hears his father's instruction." Job 32:9 says, "It is not the old who are wise, nor the aged who understand what is right." Wisdom-related knowledge and judgment are, like language learning, more natural for those who are young; the optimal age for wisdom development is between adolescence and the midtwenties.⁵³ Preparing for a life of wisdom while young moves people toward what scholars call **gerotranscendence**: *away* from superficial social engagement *toward* concern for others, meaningful relationships, and contribution to society.⁵⁴

> ***Gerotranscendence:*** **the stage in life when a person makes the shift from self-interest toward a genuine concern for others and society.**

But failing to make the pursuit of wisdom a lifelong search leads people to plateau in their maturity. You've probably heard of a "midlife crisis," in which people wonder whether their life contributions have made any difference and whether they have undersold their potential. In his song "Why, Georgia?" singer/songwriter John Mayer wonders about "the outcome of a still verdictless life" and muses, "It might be a quarter-life crisis."⁵⁵

Picked up by sociologists, the term *quarter-life crisis* has become descriptive of the transition to adulthood in which so many young adults with so much potential nonetheless feel lost, afraid, and confused.

Those focused on wisdom, on the other hand, are more likely to live with a sense of anticipation that turns obstacles into opportunities. For the wise, joy replaces fear. Growing

<!-- page-208 -->

wise is a process, not a state of being. A person can't live most of his or her life as a fool and expect to flip a switch and become wise. To grow wise, one must

- know the difference between wisdom and foolishness;
- understand the essence of true success;
- find wise people and get them to invest in you;
- gain enriching experiences;
- discover how to tell the truth about yourself;
- identify potential in others and help them learn and grow;
- work with people in spite of differences; and
- avoid the behaviors that cause wise people to become fools.

As you can see, the task of growing wise is larger than an intellectual exercise; it is a spiritual one. The evidence shows that the more you focus on spirituality while you're young, the more likely you are to be wise in *later* adulthood.⁵⁶ So what does spiritual exercise look like? Let's talk about that now.

### *Love*

**Love** is the third of God's attributes he has measured out to his image bearers. Contrary to what most people think based on what they see in the popular culture, love isn't just a feeling; it takes work. It is a commitment to do hard things *regardless* of how you feel. When you promise to love your spouse until death, you are not promising to always feel a certain way toward him or her but to always *act* in a caring manner. Luke 10:25–28 records an exchange between Jesus and a lawyer that does away with the notion that love is nothing more than a warm feeling:

> ***Love:*** **a commitment to cherish others regardless of how one feels about them.**

> A lawyer stood up to put him to the test, saying, "Teacher, what shall I do to inherit eternal life?" He said to him, "What is written in the Law? How do you read it?" And he answered, "You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your strength and with all your mind, and your neighbor as yourself." And he said to him, "You have answered correctly; do this, and you will live."

Many people are concerned that they don't really love God because they seldom have warm feelings for him during times of worship. But loving God is obeying him even when you

<!-- page-209 -->

are mad at him, confused by his actions, or lacking in feeling toward him. In the same way, loving our neighbors means doing right by them even when we are upset with them.

Love for God is a barometer for all other loves. If we love God richly and fully, this will spill out into a life of love for our neighbors. So how do we cultivate a life of love for God? Like with a tree that produces delicious fruit, it happens in its time, with careful attention. It is formed through what we habitually do. It is not just Christians who see this. The ancient Greek philosopher Aristotle believed that *habits* connected belief and action. Only good habits can keep us from living just for our next meal. They rule our bellies and build our chests—our sense of determination and will—and give us something worth pursuing in life.

To Aristotle, the purpose for human existence was to live the "good life."⁵⁷ In his book *Nicomachean Ethics*, he used the term **eudaimonia** to describe a life of flourishing and happiness.⁵⁸ Nicomachus was Aristotle's son, so many readers see the book, which outlines much of his thinking, as similar to Solomon's writing of the book of Proverbs to give guidance to his offspring.

> ***Eudaimonia:*** **a term used in ancient Greek philosophy to describe a life of flourishing and happiness.**

In *Nicomachean Ethics*, Aristotle says that people can find happiness in living the good life by practicing "virtues": good habits that allow them to flourish. Virtues are the "golden mean" between excess and defect. For example, it is not virtuous to be a coward and run away from trouble, but nor is it virtuous to unthinkingly rush into trouble. To Aristotle, true courage is measured; it does not turn away, nor does it mindlessly engage. He believed that the most important virtues to practice are as follows:

> Justice: "What is right?"
>
> Temperance: "What is the reasonable course?"
>
> Prudence: "What is wise in a practical sense?"
>
> Fortitude: "How will I push forward in spite of obstacles?"

> ***Prime Mover (aka Unmoved Mover):*** **Aristotle's conception of an utterly transcendent, impersonal, immortal, immaterial, necessary, and unchanging being that set the universe into motion.**

Although early Christians thought a great deal about Aristotle's ideas, they recognized that they were based on a Greek conception of God that taught that God was a **prime mover** but could not really be personally known. To Greeks, "God" is really just pure thought that exists apart from the world. Christianity goes much further than this. It says that God can be truly known.⁵⁹

That God can be known is what transforms our understanding of him from something we respect to someone we love. This love animates our love for others and, in turn, draws out the beauty in us. As the church father Augustine said, "Beauty grows in you to the extent that love grows, because charity itself is the soul's beauty."⁶⁰

<!-- page-210 -->

Speaker John Stonestreet, from the Chuck Colson Center, has adopted a set of questions from Australian thought leader Rod Thompson. Stonestreet recommends asking these questions to connect our love for God and the life habits that lead to flourishing:

- **What are my loves?** With what or whom am I intimate? What causes me to offer my intimacy? (Do I love the right things? Are my loves properly ordered?)
- **What are my loyalties?** Who or what gets the real me? What causes me to commit my time and energy?
- **What are my longings?** Toward what am I aiming my life? What is success? If I continue where I have aimed, where will I end up? (Our imagination shapes our actions. What are we thinking about in our private moments?)
- **What are my liturgies?** What do I worship? What are the habits of my life? (Liturgies are a fancy theological term for the rhythms of life.)⁶¹

These four questions are important because if we are not intentional, we'll be swept along thinking about what everyone else is thinking about, focused on what everyone else is focused on, loving what everyone else loves, and doing what everyone else is doing.

What specific habits should Christians pursue? Two are properly basic, in that without them it is difficult to keep our attention focused on God and his glory. We'll look at more habits in the next chapter when we look at how redeemed image bearing affects the way we love our neighbors as ourselves, but the following two habits are scripturally prescribed means of connecting with and loving God.

**Explore God's Word.** Charles Colson described the Bible this way:

> The Bible—banned, burned, beloved. More widely read, more frequently attacked than any other book in history. Generations of intellectuals have attempted to discredit it, dictators of every age have outlawed it and executed those who read it. Yet soldiers carry it into battle believing it more powerful than their weapons. Fragments of it smuggled into solitary prison cells have transformed ruthless killers into gentle saints.⁶²

In view of the incredible impact of the Bible through human history, we should take time each day to study it, embracing the opportunity to dip into the river of history itself, as nearly all great persons in the last two thousand years have. Skeptics and nonbelievers cannot figure out how their mockery and scorn shade the truth. As the famous theologian J. I. Packer said, "One of the many divine qualities of the Bible is this: that it does not yield its secrets to the irreverent and censorious."⁶³ Read the Bible not to defend or attack it but as a means of learning to love God.

**Pray.** The character of C. S. Lewis in the movie *Shadowlands*, when confronted with why he engaged in such an ineffectual and primitive practice as prayer, said, "I pray because I can't help myself. I pray because I'm helpless. I pray because the need flows out of me all

<!-- page-211 -->

the time—waking and sleeping. It doesn't change God—it changes me."⁶⁴ If you aren't sure what to pray, begin by turning to the book of Psalms, which includes many prayers, and pray them back to God. This will help you learn to cultivate, as David did, a heart after God.

### *Mercy*

The fourth communicable attribute of God is **mercy**. Agents of mercy bring blessing wherever they go. And because the gospel aims to bless all nations, those who embrace God's story are agents of mercy, embodying the gospel of grace and moving into the world as though arriving at a disaster with the gifts of a life-giving and truly healing remedy. We bring true *shalom*: peace, well-being, restoration. We bring more than rescue; we bring transformation. This is how we love our neighbors, and we will invest all of chapter 9 exploring how to do it better.

## 10. Conclusion

The gospel of God is not merely a plan by which we avoid hell but also a way to live differently now. Jesus said in Matthew 28:18–20 that all authority in heaven and on earth had been given to him and that, in response, his disciples would teach the nations to obey God. It's a clear covenantal statement of what the gospel is about: making disciples of the nations, baptizing them into the Trinity, and preparing them to obey God wherever Jesus has authority, which is to say *every area of life*. As Abraham Kuyper, a theologian who became prime minister of the Netherlands, famously stated, "There is not one square inch of the entire creation about which Jesus Christ does not cry out, 'This is mine! This belongs to me!'"⁶⁵

> **Jesus said in Matthew 28:18–20 that all authority in heaven and on earth had been given to him and that, in response, his disciples would teach the nations to obey God. It's a clear covenantal statement of what the gospel is about: making disciples of the nations, baptizing them into the Trinity, and preparing them to obey God wherever Jesus has authority, which is to say *every area of life*.**

C. S. Lewis, for one, grasped how profound of a shift the earthly ministry of Christ truly was in reconciling us with God and preparing us for an altogether different kind of life. As the Christ figure Aslan said in *The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe*, "When a willing victim who had committed no treachery was killed in a traitor's stead … even death itself would turn backwards."⁶⁶ It is like that in fact, not just in fiction: in Christ, death itself has turned backwards.

That death itself would turn backward is the hope in which Henry Wadsworth Longfellow rested in proclaiming that "God is not dead; nor doth he sleep." God wins. Death loses.

<!-- page-191 -->

# Chapter 8

# What the Bible Says about Loving God

## 1. From Hopelessness to Hope

Christmas holiday songs can be trite and even silly, but one that has stood the test of time is Frank Sinatra's rendering

<!-- page-192 -->

of "I Heard the Bells on Christmas Day."¹ It was originally a poem by Henry Wadsworth Longfellow called "Christmas Bells."

> *I heard the bells on Christmas Day*
> *Their old, familiar carols play,*
>     *And wild and sweet*
>     *The words repeat*
> *Of peace on earth, good-will to men!*
>
> *And thought how, as the day had come,*
> *The belfries of all Christendom*
>     *Had rolled along*
>     *The unbroken song*
> *Of peace on earth, good-will to men!*

These verses reflect both a tender reminiscence and an awestruck realization that people all around the earth celebrate the birth of Christ. Just beneath these beautiful words, however, lies a story of a very broken man struggling to hold on to his belief in God and humanity.

"Christmas Bells" was composed Christmas morning, 1863, while Longfellow walked alone down a frosty street in Cambridge, Massachusetts. Not too long before, his second wife, Frances Appleton, had succumbed to injuries she suffered after her dress had caught on fire.²

> **Just beneath these beautiful words lies a story of a very broken man struggling to hold on to his belief in God and humanity.**

Longfellow had, years before, lost his first wife and his daughter. And now *this*?

But Longfellow's confusion wasn't just personal. The Northern and Southern armies were at that time locked in combat in a vicious Civil War. The nation Abraham Lincoln had called "the last best hope of earth" seemed daily to be dissolving into an era of unprecedented slaughter: neighbor against neighbor, brother against brother.

Utter loneliness. Hopelessness. The third verse of Sinatra's "I Heard the Bells on Christmas Day" or the sixth verse of the original "Christmas Bells" expresses Longfellow's sorrow:

> *And in despair I bowed my head;*
> *"There is no peace on earth," I said:*
>     *"For hate is strong,*
>     *And mocks the song*
> *Of peace on earth, good-will to men!"*

The temptation to hopelessness confronts every generation and every culture. A few years ago, the news reported that a famous diplomat, Richard Holbrooke, passed away after an unsuccessful surgery to repair a torn aorta. Holbrooke's last words were, "You've got to stop this war in Afghanistan."³ He died, literally and figuratively, of a broken heart. For decades he had traveled the world pleading for peace, yet on his deathbed, he found

<!-- page-193 -->

himself grappling with the awful recognition that peace is one thing human effort alone can never bring.

Yet we hope for—long for—things to be right-side up rather than upside down. We crave *shalom*. Psalm 78 counsels the people of Israel to teach God's principles to children "so that they should set their hope in God and not forget the works of God, but keep his commandments; and that they should not be like their fathers, a stubborn and rebellious generation, a generation whose heart was not steadfast, whose spirit was not faithful to God" (vv. 7–8).

> ***Shalom:*** **from the Hebrew for "peace, prosperity, and wellness"; implies harmony in creation and with one's neighbors as well as a right relationship with God.**

And not only should we have hope, but we should also proclaim it. First Peter 3:15 says "always" to be "prepared to make a defense to anyone who asks you for a reason for the hope that is in you." Our hope ought to turn heads, and we must be ready to explain its source.

In this way, Longfellow's final stanza is a shout of rescue to the despairing poet meandering down that wintry lane:

> *Then pealed the bells more loud and deep:*
> *"God is not dead; nor doth he sleep!*
>     *The Wrong shall fail,*
>     *The Right prevail,*
> *With peace on earth, good-will to men!"* ⁴

This is hope: that God is alive and awake; that he stepped into his own creation, entering the world stage as a helpless baby; that Immanuel, God with us, lived among us and willingly gave himself over to death on the cross, paying the penalty for our sin; that he was resurrected, overcoming death; and that he promises life of the ages to all with ears to hear.

Longfellow's poem expresses the sorrow of a fallen world but also the metamorphosis of *shalom*: the repairing, rebuilding, renewing, and refreshing of the relationships that so violently ruptured in the fall. God's redemption brings restoration and reconciliation—to God, self, others, and the creation. This is the most significant development in human history, as Richard John Neuhaus eloquently expresses:

> We have not the right to despair, for despair is a sin. And finally we have not the reason to despair, quite simply because Christ has risen. And this is the strength of a Christian world view, the strength of the Christian way of telling the story of the world: it has no illusions about it. All the other stories are built upon delusions, vain dreams, and utopias.⁵

In this chapter, we'll look at "you and God" to ask what it means to be image bearers of God in a created, fallen, and redeemed world. We'll talk openly about the nature of sin and idolatry and explore what it means to live righteously, wisely, lovingly, and mercifully as God's image bearers in an age of redemption. In the following chapter, we'll look at "you and the world" to see the implications of the Bible's metanarrative for how our loving God transforms

<!-- page-194 -->

our relationships with those around us. Let's begin with a brief review of who God is and what it means that we bear his image.

## 2. Who Is God?

As we saw in our study of the biblical metanarrative, there are two most common names for God in the language of God's covenant people:

- **Elohim** ("God") is a generic designation for "deity" or "powerful" and focuses on God as the creator of the whole world.
- **Yahweh** ("I Am Who I Am") is the personal and covenantal name of Israel's God. Preeminently, he is the God who redeemed his people from Egypt and brought them into covenant relationship with himself. Translators usually render Yahweh as "the LORD," which, while accurate, does not capture for most readers God's deeply personal nature.

> ***Elohim:*** **from the Hebrew for "deity"; the generic name used in the Old Testament for the creator-God.**

> ***Yahweh:*** **from the Hebrew for "I Am"; the personal and covenantal name of God used in the Old Testament.**

In Genesis 1, God is referred to as *Elohim*, the great creator of the world. The narrative that describes his creative work is a doxology, a hymn of praise to the only one powerful enough to form and fill the entire universe. In Genesis 2:4, God is introduced with both names as *Yahweh Elohim* ("the 'I Am Who I Am' Lord God"). Together, these two titles showcase God as both the awesome creator and the loving redeemer who is Israel's covenant God.

> **We have seen that no aspect of his character takes second place to any other aspect. For example, God doesn't cease to be loving when he judges sin.**

We have also seen in our study that God reveals many of his attributes to his human creation. For example, God is holy (set apart), eternal (has always existed), omniscient (all-knowing), omnipotent (all-powerful), omnipresent (everywhere present), and unchanging. God is also righteous (always just in his decisions), loving (the perfect expression of self-giving), wise (generates no unintended consequences), and merciful (gives us what we don't deserve). God doesn't *become* these things by doing them; he *embodies* them. Further, we have seen that no aspect of his character takes second place to any other aspect. For example, God doesn't cease to be loving when he judges sin.

These attributes give us insight into how God designed us, how we humans are affected by the fall, and how we are being redeemed in our image-bearing capacity.

## 3. Who Are We?

Christians believe in an identifiable human nature. We are embodied persons, made to bear the image of a personal God. The properties most important to our personhood are

<!-- page-195 -->

shared with him.⁶ We are composed of immaterial entities: soul, spirit, mind, heart, will, consciousness, and intuition.⁷ Our bodies maintain their identifiable form, but our identity, our consciousness, continues undisrupted.⁸

Possessing both bodies and souls, we humans exist and are sentient beings (that is, we are aware of our existence).⁹ Humans are, by our nature, religious. We sense that there is "something more" to the universe. We intuitively know that somehow our lives are lived in response to that greater reality.

Of course, many people claim not to be religious. Some further claim that their nonreligious state is actually the true, natural state of human beings, as if somehow religious people are defective or, as the criticism often goes, delusional. One such group calls themselves "Brights," implying that those who disagree are dull.¹⁰ But the evidence is not that humans are nonreligious by nature. In fact, it is the opposite. University of Notre Dame sociologist Christian Smith has studied the religious nature of humans and concluded that the nonreligious have deactivated a natural tendency in transferring the object of their worship to knowledge, possessions, or themselves:

> This not only helps to explain religion's primordial, irrepressible, widespread, and seemingly inextinguishable character in the human experience, it also suggests that the skeptical Enlightenment, secular humanist, and New Atheist visions for a totally secular human world are simply not realistic—they are cutting against a very strong grain in the nature of reality's structure and so will fail to achieve their purpose. But that is not the whole story. Taking the concept of "being religious by nature" in a properly critical sense also helps us interpret the data that tells us that human beings and societies often are not religious. This view tells us that nonreligious people possess the natural capacities and tendencies toward religion but that those capacities and tendencies have not been activated by environmental, experiential triggers or else have been activated but then neutralized or deactivated by some other social forces.¹¹

Of course, in order to have a religious nature, we must have a human nature first. It cannot be, as Postmodernism insists, that humans do not have an identifiable nature or essence, a "singular and unique 'I.'"¹² If Postmodernism is true, we might be subjects, bodies, or units, but we are not beings or persons. There is only an ever-evolving, highly sexual, social animal with multiple subjective interests crying out for recognition and acceptance.¹³ We are like onions: when you're done peeling away the layers of culture, nothing remains.

Not everyone thinks Postmodernism has it all figured out. In his textbook on Postmodernism, Glenn Ward points out that the highly respected philosopher Jürgen Habermas, for one, "disputes the claims of some postmodern thinkers that human identity is unstable, fragmented, or 'in process.'… For him we all, deep down, share eternal human needs and desires. The failure of the Postmodernists is that they refuse to propose a route towards the fulfillment of these."¹⁴

We sense that we have an enduring nature because we actually do, the biblical account insists. Rather than being like onions, we are more like peaches with a hard seed in the middle.

<!-- page-196 -->

God made us in his image and fashioned us for his glory. Let's take a look at what image bearing means, how the fall affected it, and how God redeems it.

## 4. Image Bearing: Created

As we saw in earlier chapters, image was a very important concept in the ancient Near Eastern culture in which the Bible was written. Kings set up images of themselves in conquered cities to remind people who was in charge. An image symbolized authority over a certain domain.

But when God decided to set up his image, he didn't do it by carving statues; he formed living, breathing humans. God did not merely want his creation to acknowledge his sovereignty; he wanted his creation to reflect it by living with purpose, trust, confidence, decisiveness, creativity, and responsibility.

> **When God decided to set up his image, he didn't do it by carving statues; he formed living, breathing humans. God did not merely want his creation to acknowledge his sovereignty; he wanted his creation to reflect it by living with purpose, trust, confidence, decisiveness, creativity, and responsibility.**

We see this in Genesis 2:18, when God announced, "It is not good that the man should be alone; I will make him a helper fit for him." He then created the animals and brought them to the man so he could name them. After the animals were named, the man was led to realize that none of the creatures was the complete kind of helper he needed. He needed a helper with whom he could walk and share love, someone who would help him accomplish his massive mission.

Even before God created woman, though, we can see how having lots of animals to take care of helped Adam, deepening his appreciation for God's creativity, expanding his awareness of nature, and, most important, helping him grow in responsibility. With every act of naming, Adam became more like the thoughtful, whimsical, hardworking, proactive, artistic, "can-do," responsibility-taking, abundance-minded God in whose image he was made.

Giving us jobs to do—*very big* jobs—is one way God shapes us into his image. But what exactly does it mean to bear God's image? If, as the Bible teaches, we are fallen creatures, does humanity resemble God *less* today than we resembled him before the fall? Or do Christians perhaps bear God's image differently than those who remain in rebellion against him? These are important and difficult questions about God's image in us. Over time, three different views of the *imago Dei* have emerged:

- **Resemblance.** The most popular view says we are "like God" with respect to certain attributes such as intelligence, rationality, emotions, free will, morality, and ability to communicate. Because this view focuses on "how we are" (our being or nature) instead of "what we do" (our function), it's called an *ontological* view.
- **Relationship.** This view expands on the idea of resemblance, saying we are like God by our being relational. We relate to God and one another. In our relational capacity, we can even relate to false gods—to idols.

<!-- page-197 -->

- **Rule.** Some connect their understanding of "image of God" to his commanding humanity to rule and have dominion over the rest of creation (Gen. 1:28).¹⁵ This view, which as opposed to our *being* is focused on our *function*, gains strength when we remember that in ancient Near East literature, "image" and "likeness" signified one's rule, one's function. In this sense, humans are fully images of God even after the fall. We all bear God's image equally, and we do this uniquely as humans.

These are three very different views, but Old Testament professor Kenneth Turner thinks they can be synthesized.¹⁶ Perhaps we are "like God" in our function as rulers on the earth, but we also possess the God-given tools needed to carry out that function, such as intelligence, ability to communicate, and so forth. Even in our fallen state, we are able to use these tools, however imperfectly, to carry out our mission and relate to one another and even to God. Humans were created to bear God's image, and all do, even when only faint traces of the family resemblance persist.

## 5. Image Bearing: Fallen

The **doctrine of the fall** teaches us that things are not as God originally intended. As we saw while examining the biblical metanarrative, our first parents tried to slough off their image-bearing capacity but found underneath only nakedness and shame, not the shiny skin of wisdom they'd hoped for. Irresponsibility, paranoia, and blame replaced responsibility, trust, and purpose. God then pronounced a curse on the serpent, the woman, and the man.

> ***Doctrine of the Fall:*** **the orthodox Christian belief that sin entered the natural world when Adam and Eve chose to disobey God and ate from the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil.**

A God who curses people forever because they ate some fruit fits the Secularist portrayal of God as a mean-spirited judge whose punishments do not fit the crime. But this stereotype misrepresented what really happened. The curse was not God saying, "I'm angry, so I'm going to ruin your lives!" Rather, it was the man and woman calling down upon themselves the natural consequences of their actions. They said, in essence, "We can handle it from here. Leave us alone." Without God's presence, what once had been pleasurable became painful. Without God's touch, what once had been obedient became rebellious. Without God's wisdom, what once had been fruitful became barren. God's constant presence does not merely comfort us pleasantly but also holds everything together; the garment of nature, however, by our rebellion, unravels at the seams. It's easier to see this if we understand sin's nature and how it affects human nature. Let's examine that next.

> ***Parasite:*** **an organism that survives at the expense of a host (for example, viruses, bacteria, tapeworms, flukes, fleas, ticks, and louses).**

## 6. What Sin Does to Us

As professor emeritus of religion Albert Wolters explains, sin is like a parasite on human nature.¹⁷ *Parasite*

<!-- page-198 -->

is the generic name for any organism that survives at the expense of the host. Viruses and bacteria are parasites, for example, as are tapeworms, flukes, fleas, ticks, and louses. They survive only by living off a life-generating host organism.

In other words, parasites can survive only if the host organism off which they are surviving is really alive—if it contains a high degree of order, is responsive to stimuli, maintains stable internal conditions, can acquire the energy it needs to stay alive, grows, reproduces, and changes through time without changing its basic genetic characteristics.¹⁸ Most parasites do not kill their host, at least not right away. Tapeworms don't kill your dog, at least directly; they just steal the nutrients your dog needs to sustain life.

Here's what we know about parasites:

- Everyone is at risk. Parasites are everywhere in the environment and are difficult to avoid.
- Parasites are opportunistic. They thrive in sick bodies.
- Parasites are often difficult to detect.
- It is difficult to get rid of parasites.¹⁹

Sin is like this. It is parasitical. Take lying, for example. Lying couldn't exist unless we humans had the capacity to tell the truth. When we distort this truth-telling capacity to mislead others, to get them to believe that what is *not* actually true is in fact the way things really are, we have invited a parasite into our lives. Our relationship with others is broken. Not only do our words invite skepticism if we are discovered to have lied, but our natures are such that we assume that others are lying to us just as we are to them. The parasite of lying continues to eat away at both truth and relationship.

## 7. What We Can Do about Sin

So what do we do about sin? When a creature is afflicted with parasites, the goal is to remove them, not to kill the host. If the host is unhealthy, restoring it to health must be part of the prescription. To do this with the parasite of sin, though, we must know something of the state to which we wish to restore people.²⁰ This means first seeking a clear picture of physical and spiritual health.

If we consider health from only a physical point of view, we'll miss very important insights about how to be truly healthy. We might look at a physically vibrant twentysomething and see only a picture of health, or we might believe that an elderly person, stooped and wheelchair bound, is merely a product of time and gravity. But if we are more than our bodies—if we are something soulish, mindful, and spirited—then what from the body's perspective appears to be healthy could actually be an advanced state of decay, and what appears to be the cruelty of aging sin, but it is fair to say that all views agree on this one thing: sin diminishes or covers up the *imago Dei*, but it doesn't kill it. We may be fallen image bearers, but we never stop being image bearers.

<!-- page-199 -->

To really restore people to health, we must know about the spiritual parasites afflicting us all. The most vicious parasite, because it goes directly to the heart of humanity's bearing of God's image, is idolatry.

## 8. Idolatry: Attacking God's Image

Without a sense of who God is, we can never grasp what true health looks like. The Bible has a word for anything that diverts us from perceiving God clearly: *idolatry*. Idolatry is so much more than making graven images. If that's all it was, we would probably be off the hook. Most of us don't make carvings and worship them. But when it comes to wrong ideas about God, none of us is off the hook. A. W. Tozer explains:

> The essence of idolatry is the entertainment of thoughts about God that are unworthy of Him. It begins in the mind and may be present where no overt act of worship has taken place.… Wrong ideas about God are not only the fountain from which the polluted waters of idolatry flow; they are themselves idolatrous. The idolater simply imagines things about God and acts as if they were true.²¹

Bizarrely, this is what happened after God led the children of Israel out of Egypt. While Moses received the Ten Commandments, his brother Aaron fashioned a golden calf and other idols and announced, "These are your gods, O Israel, who brought you up out of the land of Egypt!" (Exod. 32:4). A *golden calf* had brought them out of Egypt? How had they become so stupid this quickly?

### You Become What You Worship

We might think we are superior to a tribe of refugees who danced around a golden calf, but we share with those ancient Israelites the same core problem. In our fear and arrogance, we construct things to worship only to end up resembling the idols we have created. This is one of the direst consequences of idolatry, according to Psalm 135. Not only do idols steal the worship of which God alone is worthy but they actually transmute the worshipper into the image of what is being worshipped:

> The idols of the nations are silver and gold, the work of human hands. They have mouths, but do not speak; they have eyes, but do not see; they have ears, but do not hear, nor is there any breath in their mouths. Those who make them become like them, so do all who trust in them. (vv. 15–18)

So when we idolize any part of the created world, we take on its attributes and in a sense "become" what we worship. If we worship things rather than the creator, we end up becoming like things: we can't see or hear or think about what is true, and we begin seeing others as objects to be used for our own benefit rather than as image bearers of God.

> **So when we idolize any part of the created world, we take on its attributes and in a sense "become" what we worship. If we worship things rather than the creator, we end up becoming like things: we can't see or hear or think about what is true, and we begin seeing others as objects to be used for our own benefit rather than as image bearers of God.**

<!-- page-200 -->

If God had not made us living, breathing representations of his authority, we might occasionally worship the created thing rather than the creator. But God's image is at the heart of everything, as even the Old Testament law in Leviticus reflects: the two things that called for the death penalty were crimes against God's covenant, and crimes that distort his image, as in, say, graven images or abuse or murder of people. If the Creator actually exists, worshipping the created thing rather than the Creator is absurd, like believing that the football itself—rather than football players—scores winning touchdowns.

Not only is it absurd to replace life-giving persons with lifeless objects, but it is also offensive. Imagine how ripped off you would feel to tour the world-famous San Diego Zoo and find that the animals had been replaced with inanimate models. Similarly, trying to off-load our image-bearing capacity onto lifeless objects is to rip off God. It would be like knocking out a priceless Chagall stained-glass window to put up a bedsheet or trading the Hope Diamond for Mardi Gras beads.

Still, in this sense, we all have much in common with the children of Israel, who traded the presence of almighty God for a golden calf, and with Judas, who traded the life of his friend and teacher for thirty pieces of silver. People make these kinds of bad trades all the time: trading a lifelong marriage for a night with a prostitute, or a God-given talent for a shaky crack high, or a deep friendship for the pleasure of a snarky social media post. We become shallow, unstable, unthinking, and uncaring, just like the things we worship.

What can save us from our moldy, withered, shuffling, drooling imitation of God's goodness? Only one thing.

### The More We Understand God, the Less We Will Worship Ourselves

We are rescued from idolatry only by understanding once again who God is. When we encounter him, we see what our nature without him is like. He is holy and we are not. Moses and Isaiah were two men who saw God. Both were pretty good guys trying to do what God wanted, yet their first reaction to their sin was being overcome with a renewed sense of its seriousness. Let's take a look at each.

"Please show me your glory," Moses asked God. The narrative then reads as follows:

> He said, "I will make all my goodness pass before you and will proclaim before you my name 'The LORD.' And I will be gracious to whom I will be gracious, and will show mercy on whom I will show mercy. But," he said, "you cannot see my face, for man shall not see me and live." And the LORD said, "Behold, there is a place by me where you shall stand on the rock, and while my glory passes by I will put you in a cleft of the rock, and I will cover you with my hand until I have passed by. Then I will take away my hand, and you shall see my back, but my face shall not be seen." (Exod. 33:19–23)

So God in all his goodness passed before Moses, proclaiming the full meaning of his name, the Lord:

<!-- page-201 -->

> The LORD, the LORD, a God merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and abounding in steadfast love and faithfulness, keeping steadfast love for thousands, forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin, but who will by no means clear the guilty, visiting the iniquity of the fathers on the children and the children's children, to the third and the fourth generation. (34:6–7)

Moses, out of reflex, hit the deck: "And Moses quickly bowed his head toward the earth and worshipped. And he said, 'If now I have found favor in your sight, O Lord, please let the Lord go in the midst of us, for it is a stiff-necked people, and pardon our iniquity and our sin, and take us for your inheritance'" (vv. 8–9). In experiencing the full goodness of the Lord, Moses grasped that his own sin—not just the sin of his people—was also the problem.

For the second example, we fast-forward a few hundred years to Jerusalem just prior to the exile of the tribe of Judah. The prophet Isaiah, in Isaiah 6:1–4, vividly describes a vision:

> In the year that King Uzziah died I saw the Lord sitting upon a throne, high and lifted up; and the train of his robe filled the temple. Above him stood the seraphim. Each had six wings: with two he covered his face, and with two he covered his feet, and with two he flew. And one called to another and said: "Holy, holy, holy is the LORD of hosts; the whole earth is full of his glory!" And the foundations of the thresholds shook at the voice of him who called, and the house was filled with smoke.

Isaiah reacted similarly to Moses: "Woe is me! For I am lost; for I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips; for my eyes have seen the King, the LORD of hosts!" (v. 5). In the light of God's glory, Isaiah saw himself as an unclean man leading an unclean people.

> **Only in the all-seeing light of God's glory do we see ourselves correctly. We realize how ridiculous it is to worship ourselves or other people or things. God's glory points with laser-like precision, revealing our hidden idols of self-doubt and low expectations as nothing more than masked pride.**

Only in the all-seeing light of God's glory do we see ourselves correctly. We realize how ridiculous it is to worship ourselves or other people or things. God's glory points with laser-like precision, revealing our hidden idols of self-doubt and low expectations as nothing more than masked pride. God's glory instantly scours away any illusion that we are superior to anyone else. The white-hot hum of God's glory also ignites within us a burning determination to declare war against *anything* standing in the way of fully bearing the image of the always-good, always-merciful, and always-faithful God.

God's glory reveals how fallen our condition is, like the examining room light that fully exposes all the damage done by the parasites that have tried to destroy us. God does not merely try to make the best of a bad situation; he is a redeemer at war with anything that wars against his image bearers.

<!-- page-202 -->

## 9. Image Bearing: Redeemed

Romans 8:29 says, "Those whom he foreknew he also predestined to be conformed to the image of his Son." Beneath the theological debate over the doctrine of predestination, a deeper point reveals itself: what it means to be conformed to the image of Jesus. God aims to restore us to the place where we can bear his image righteously, wisely, lovingly, and mercifully. In each of these four communicable attributes of God, we can discern how we ought to live in light of Christ's redemption.

### *Righteousness*

The first of the four communicable attributes we will explore is **righteousness**, which means for us humans a strong personal desire to understand and embody the character of Christ.

> ***Righteousness:*** **the quality of being morally and spiritually right with God.**

**Understand your identity in Christ.** A person's **identity** is the set of characteristics, gifting, and convictions that make him "who" he is. One's identity develops through time and experience. Psychologist James E. Marcia, based on the work of psychologist Erik Erikson, developed a series of tests to examine Erikson's thought about how young adults form a sense of identity.²² He found that people go through four phases as their sense of identity develops:

> ***Identity:*** **the set of characteristics, giftings, and convictions that uniquely define who a person is.**

- **Identity Diffusion:** Diffusion is when people flounder but are unconcerned about it. They have not yet arrived at their purpose in life or understood who they are. They have no answers and few, if any, questions.
- **Identity Foreclosure:** Foreclosure is when people embrace a certain identity by ignoring any questions or thoughts that might challenge it. Usually they just follow the dictates of those in authority over them. They might have answers, but they have not questioned them.
- **Identity Moratorium:** Moratorium is a full-blown identity crisis. People in this stage struggle, concerning themselves with finding answers to unanswered questions.
- **Identity Achievement:** When a person has a stable sense of identity—committed to certain goals, beliefs, and values—that person has reached identity achievement. He has asked the right questions and has settled on answers.

Some people never make it out of phase one, *diffusion*. Their own identities are so poorly developed that they find themselves unable to know God or care about spiritual things and life purpose. Others make it into the second phase, *foreclosure*, because they were raised in families that made clear the values they ought to embrace but may find themselves dangerously

<!-- page-203 -->

relying on too much certainty or too much doubt, and rather than *actually* knowing, they only *think* they know.

The third phase, *moratorium*, is common in our culture among college students. Their beliefs have been challenged by new views and information, and they don't know what to do. They're struggling. The fourth phase, *achievement*, is the most stable place to be. Having wrestled with the difficult issues and having emerged with a sense of identity and purpose, a person in this phase is more prepared to move confidently into the next season of life.

> **From a biblical perspective, we can never really know ourselves properly without first knowing God through Jesus Christ.**

From a biblical perspective, we can never really know ourselves properly without first knowing God through Jesus Christ. In the gospel of Matthew, we see an example of one of the disciples, Peter, being moved to identity achievement through acknowledging God through Christ. It took place in the district of Caesarea Philippi, which was a center of both religious and political worship.

> Now when Jesus came into the district of Caesarea Philippi, he asked his disciples, "Who do people say that the Son of Man is?" And they said, "Some say John the Baptist, others say Elijah, and others Jeremiah or one of the prophets." He said to them, "But who do you say that I am?" Simon Peter replied, "You are the Christ, the Son of the living God." And Jesus answered him, "Blessed are you, Simon Bar-Jonah! For flesh and blood has not revealed this to you, but my Father who is in heaven. And I tell you, you are Peter, and on this rock I will build my church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. I will give you the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and whatever you bind on earth shall be bound in heaven, and whatever you loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven." (16:13–19)

Notice how Simon's identifying of the established work of Christ is nested in Christ's establishment of Simon's identity. By renaming Simon "Peter," which means "rock," Jesus takes what from a human standpoint would be an offense—"You're as dumb as a rock"—and transforms it into a picture of strength, steadfast to the point where not even the gates of hell can dislodge what God is accomplishing.

> **The New Testament is full of passages that describe what it would mean to trust Christ with your identity.**

Peter's identity achievement did not make him perfect. It did not place him beyond the reach of doubt. In fact, during Jesus's trial, Peter denied even knowing him. But when restored by Jesus, Peter learned to "doubt his doubts." He became a man on a death-defying mission to proclaim the gospel.

The New Testament is full of passages that describe what it would mean to trust Christ with your identity:

- You have the right to be a child of God (John 1:12).²³
- By abiding in Christ, you will bear much fruit (John 15:5).²⁴

<!-- page-204 -->

- You are free from spiritual condemnation (Rom. 8:1).²⁵
- You are heirs with Christ of whatever God has to give (Rom. 8:16–17).²⁶
- You are one spirit with Christ (1 Cor. 6:17).²⁷
- You are able to glorify God in your body (1 Cor. 6:19–20).²⁸
- You are a new creation (2 Cor. 5:17).²⁹
- You have become God's kind of righteous (2 Cor. 5:21).³⁰
- Christ lives in you (Gal. 2:20).³¹
- You have been blessed with every spiritual blessing (Eph. 1:3).³²
- You are holy and blameless before God (Eph. 1:4).³³
- You are rooted in Christ and built up in him (Col. 2:7).³⁴
- You have been filled with Christ in whom all authority resides (Col. 2:10).³⁵
- You need not fear, as you have the capacity for power, love, and self-control (2 Tim. 1:7).³⁶
- You are a recipient of mercy and grace when you need it (Heb. 4:16).³⁷
- You have escaped the bondage to corruption that comes through sinful desire (2 Pet. 1:4).³⁸
- The evil one cannot touch you (1 John 5:18).³⁹

**Repent and be restored.** The Scriptures reveal how Christ's righteousness is available to operate in us. For most, though, such promises are abstractions they have not personally experienced. At Summit Ministries, we once surveyed students from our leadership conferences. Even among committed Christians, before they attended the program, only one-third reported feeling close to God. Something stood in the way of a close relationship with their Creator.⁴⁰

> ***Repentance:*** **from the Greek for "changing one's mind"; the process of reviewing, regretting, and then changing direction with one's thoughts and actions.**

God has a way of knocking down the barrier to spiritual victory. It is called **repentance**. The New Testament word for "repentance" is the Greek word *metanoia*, which means "changing one's mind." The word *metanoia* was often used in a philosophical sense, referring to changing one's mind-set: rejecting an inferior way of life and setting off on the path of enlightenment. This kind of change comes only from a radical shift to a far-superior way of life. As pastor Tim Keller has said, "Fear-based

<!-- page-205 -->

repentance makes us hate ourselves. Joy-based repentance makes us hate the sin."⁴¹ According to Scripture, God's kindness leads us to repentance of the right sort (Rom. 2:4).⁴²

Repentance almost never takes place on our own. The Holy Spirit leads us to repentance by what Proverbs 27:6 calls "the wounds of a friend." We need accountability, someone who will confront us with our sin, someone in whom we can confide. In fact, for much of church history, repentance was part of the public act of worship. Because sin is not merely a private act but has public implications, repentance ought also be done, at least in part, in a public manner.

The Book of Common Prayer, for example, offers a beautiful and humbling prayer of repentance that would be a good model for anyone who wants to be restored to right relationship with God:

> Almighty and most merciful Father; We have erred, and strayed from Thy ways like lost sheep. We have followed too much the devices and desires of our own hearts. We have offended against Thy holy laws. We have left undone those things which we ought to have done; And we have done those things which we ought not to have done; And there is no health in us. But Thou, O Lord, have mercy upon us, miserable offenders. Spare Thou those, O God, who confess their faults. Restore Thou those who are penitent; According to Thy promises declared unto mankind in Christ Jesus our Lord. And grant, O most merciful Father, for His sake; That we may hereafter live a godly, righteous, and sober life, To the glory of Thy holy Name. Amen.⁴³

For Anglicans, this prayer is usually said at home in the morning, when the members of a household have not had many opportunities to commit sins! It reminds us that sin is a *state of being*, not just a *set of actions*, and it causes us to humbly rely on God's grace to remove sin's parasite and restore the joy of *shalom*.

**Develop a proper view of sin: structure and direction.** A second part of having our identity in Christ is having a proper view of sin. Sin does not morph us into genetic mutants incapable of bearing God's image. Rather, as we saw earlier, sin is a parasite that sucks away vital nutrients and grows itself at the expense of a healthy body. With each aspect of creation, we must think of both the "structure" of creation and the "direction" we move. Sin does not destroy the structure but hijacks it to wrong purposes.⁴⁴

> **With each aspect of creation, we must think of both the "structure" of creation and the "direction" we move. Sin does not destroy the structure but hijacks it to wrong purposes.**

Take, for example, the idea of "ambition." Many Christians think ambition is sinful in structure. They believe that it is never right to purposefully try to get the things we want. For support of their position, they turn to Scripture.⁴⁵ But the Bible condemns *selfish ambition*, not *ambition* itself. Ambition is not the problem; the problem is ambition put to selfish uses. The structure of ambition is fine, but its *direction* is often corrupted.

In our redeemed image bearing, for example, we might even think of ambition as a virtue that can be used to spread the gospel. The apostle Paul says in Romans

<!-- page-206 -->

15:20, "I make it my ambition to preach the gospel, not where Christ has already been named, lest I build on someone else's foundation." He seemed to think that ambition was good when it came to spreading the gospel. The difference between fallen image bearing and redeemed image bearing is the use to which ambition is put.

> **If the structure of creation is still good but we humans hijack it and take it in the wrong direction, discerning the *right* direction is part of redemptive image bearing.**

We can approach each of the "seven deadly sins"—wrath, greed, sloth, pride, lust, envy, and gluttony—in a similar way. Wrath takes the structure of righteousness and moves in the direction of self-righteousness. Sloth takes the structure of contentment and turns it into laziness. Pride takes the confidence we feel knowing we bear God's image and turns it toward self-worship. Lust distorts the goodness of intimacy. Envy takes the structure of protectiveness and turns it into obsessiveness. Gluttony abuses the goodness of enjoyment.

If the structure of creation is still good but we humans hijack it and take it in the wrong direction, discerning the *right* direction is part of redemptive image bearing. This skill in discerning the right direction from the many competing alternatives is called *wisdom*.

### *Wisdom*

A second communicable attribute of God, **wisdom**, does not come from how we think or feel but rather by how we act. As philosopher Mortimer Adler puts it, "We have seen artistic skill and scientific knowledge put to evil use. But we do not ordinarily think a man wise unless he acts wisely. To act wisely is to act well, even as to have wisdom is to use it."⁴⁶

> ***Wisdom:*** **the ability of thinking and acting with good judgment.**

In ancient times, there were two very different concepts of wisdom and they were not equally good. The first concept of wisdom was that it is an otherworldly state that one can reach only by detaching from the things of this world. Plato (428–348 BC), for example, saw wisdom as an unattainable form about which we could know enough to want and love it.⁴⁷ Alcinous, a pagan philosopher of the second-century AD who followed Plato in claiming that God is "eternal, ineffable, self-sufficient, without need … and perfect in every respect," taught that the only way to know such a God was to ascend from earthly things to higher realities:

> First one contemplates the beauty found in bodies, after this one passes on to the beauty of the soul, then to the beauty in customs and laws, then to the vast ocean of beauty; after this one conceives of the good itself … which appears as light and shines on the soul as it makes its ascent. Then one comes to the idea of God because of his preeminence in honor.⁴⁸

The Greek philosopher Lucretius (99–55 BC) agreed. He thought absorbing the teachings of the wise separated people from the striving masses so they could live a life free from pain, fear, or struggle.⁴⁹ Plotinus (AD 205–270) concurred but added an intellectual

<!-- page-207 -->

component—that wisdom is the state of rest or repose that comes from having reasoned your way to a satisfactory solution.⁵⁰

The second type of wisdom, the Hebrew conception, rejected the idea that wisdom was an otherworldly state attained through restful repose. The Hebrews were focused instead on making good decisions in everyday circumstances. In Hebrew, the dominant word for "wisdom" is *chokmah*, which means "skill in living."⁵¹ Although the Greeks thought that wisdom appeared in party clothes and looked a lot like leisure, the Hebrews thought it appeared in overalls and looked a lot like work.

Early Christians, drawing from the Jewish heritage of their faith, embraced the Hebrew rather than the Greek concept of wisdom. While the Romans stayed true to the Greek tradition of trying to perfect their own images, Christians focused on becoming like Christ. Such a life featured feasts and physical gatherings, and it involved healing sick people and the poor. It was very earthy. This Christian focus on the here and now so concerned the Romans that some of their writers called Christians atheists! Author and minister Peter J. Leithart explains, "Instead of ascending past sensible things to the intellectual realm, Christians said that God had made Himself known in flesh, and continues to give Himself in water and wine, bodies and bread. Christians were so earthly-minded that they could be no heavenly good."⁵²

The phrase "so earthly-minded they could be no heavenly good" is the opposite of what many Christians today are accused of being, but it is the redeemed response to Scripture. If the one who established and maintains the moral order is a *person*, then wisdom is not just a fanciful guide to better manners or winning the praise of others; it is the key to understanding the very best ways for people to live well with nature, one another, and God. It is true both now and for all eternity.

So how does one acquire wisdom? Fortunately, advanced age is not a precondition. Proverbs 10:1 says, "A wise son makes a glad father." Proverbs 13:1 says, "A wise son hears his father's instruction." Job 32:9 says, "It is not the old who are wise, nor the aged who understand what is right." Wisdom-related knowledge and judgment are, like language learning, more natural for those who are young; the optimal age for wisdom development is between adolescence and the midtwenties.⁵³ Preparing for a life of wisdom while young moves people toward what scholars call **gerotranscendence**: *away* from superficial social engagement *toward* concern for others, meaningful relationships, and contribution to society.⁵⁴

> ***Gerotranscendence:*** **the stage in life when a person makes the shift from self-interest toward a genuine concern for others and society.**

But failing to make the pursuit of wisdom a lifelong search leads people to plateau in their maturity. You've probably heard of a "midlife crisis," in which people wonder whether their life contributions have made any difference and whether they have undersold their potential. In his song "Why, Georgia?" singer/songwriter John Mayer wonders about "the outcome of a still verdictless life" and muses, "It might be a quarter-life crisis."⁵⁵

Picked up by sociologists, the term *quarter-life crisis* has become descriptive of the transition to adulthood in which so many young adults with so much potential nonetheless feel lost, afraid, and confused.

Those focused on wisdom, on the other hand, are more likely to live with a sense of anticipation that turns obstacles into opportunities. For the wise, joy replaces fear. Growing

<!-- page-208 -->

wise is a process, not a state of being. A person can't live most of his or her life as a fool and expect to flip a switch and become wise. To grow wise, one must

- know the difference between wisdom and foolishness;
- understand the essence of true success;
- find wise people and get them to invest in you;
- gain enriching experiences;
- discover how to tell the truth about yourself;
- identify potential in others and help them learn and grow;
- work with people in spite of differences; and
- avoid the behaviors that cause wise people to become fools.

As you can see, the task of growing wise is larger than an intellectual exercise; it is a spiritual one. The evidence shows that the more you focus on spirituality while you're young, the more likely you are to be wise in *later* adulthood.⁵⁶ So what does spiritual exercise look like? Let's talk about that now.

### *Love*

**Love** is the third of God's attributes he has measured out to his image bearers. Contrary to what most people think based on what they see in the popular culture, love isn't just a feeling; it takes work. It is a commitment to do hard things *regardless* of how you feel. When you promise to love your spouse until death, you are not promising to always feel a certain way toward him or her but to always *act* in a caring manner. Luke 10:25–28 records an exchange between Jesus and a lawyer that does away with the notion that love is nothing more than a warm feeling:

> ***Love:*** **a commitment to cherish others regardless of how one feels about them.**

> A lawyer stood up to put him to the test, saying, "Teacher, what shall I do to inherit eternal life?" He said to him, "What is written in the Law? How do you read it?" And he answered, "You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your strength and with all your mind, and your neighbor as yourself." And he said to him, "You have answered correctly; do this, and you will live."

Many people are concerned that they don't really love God because they seldom have warm feelings for him during times of worship. But loving God is obeying him even when you

<!-- page-209 -->

are mad at him, confused by his actions, or lacking in feeling toward him. In the same way, loving our neighbors means doing right by them even when we are upset with them.

Love for God is a barometer for all other loves. If we love God richly and fully, this will spill out into a life of love for our neighbors. So how do we cultivate a life of love for God? Like with a tree that produces delicious fruit, it happens in its time, with careful attention. It is formed through what we habitually do. It is not just Christians who see this. The ancient Greek philosopher Aristotle believed that *habits* connected belief and action. Only good habits can keep us from living just for our next meal. They rule our bellies and build our chests—our sense of determination and will—and give us something worth pursuing in life.

To Aristotle, the purpose for human existence was to live the "good life."⁵⁷ In his book *Nicomachean Ethics*, he used the term **eudaimonia** to describe a life of flourishing and happiness.⁵⁸ Nicomachus was Aristotle's son, so many readers see the book, which outlines much of his thinking, as similar to Solomon's writing of the book of Proverbs to give guidance to his offspring.

> ***Eudaimonia:*** **a term used in ancient Greek philosophy to describe a life of flourishing and happiness.**

In *Nicomachean Ethics*, Aristotle says that people can find happiness in living the good life by practicing "virtues": good habits that allow them to flourish. Virtues are the "golden mean" between excess and defect. For example, it is not virtuous to be a coward and run away from trouble, but nor is it virtuous to unthinkingly rush into trouble. To Aristotle, true courage is measured; it does not turn away, nor does it mindlessly engage. He believed that the most important virtues to practice are as follows:

> Justice: "What is right?"
>
> Temperance: "What is the reasonable course?"
>
> Prudence: "What is wise in a practical sense?"
>
> Fortitude: "How will I push forward in spite of obstacles?"

> ***Prime Mover (aka Unmoved Mover):*** **Aristotle's conception of an utterly transcendent, impersonal, immortal, immaterial, necessary, and unchanging being that set the universe into motion.**

Although early Christians thought a great deal about Aristotle's ideas, they recognized that they were based on a Greek conception of God that taught that God was a **prime mover** but could not really be personally known. To Greeks, "God" is really just pure thought that exists apart from the world. Christianity goes much further than this. It says that God can be truly known.⁵⁹

That God can be known is what transforms our understanding of him from something we respect to someone we love. This love animates our love for others and, in turn, draws out the beauty in us. As the church father Augustine said, "Beauty grows in you to the extent that love grows, because charity itself is the soul's beauty."⁶⁰

<!-- page-210 -->

Speaker John Stonestreet, from the Chuck Colson Center, has adopted a set of questions from Australian thought leader Rod Thompson. Stonestreet recommends asking these questions to connect our love for God and the life habits that lead to flourishing:

- **What are my loves?** With what or whom am I intimate? What causes me to offer my intimacy? (Do I love the right things? Are my loves properly ordered?)
- **What are my loyalties?** Who or what gets the real me? What causes me to commit my time and energy?
- **What are my longings?** Toward what am I aiming my life? What is success? If I continue where I have aimed, where will I end up? (Our imagination shapes our actions. What are we thinking about in our private moments?)
- **What are my liturgies?** What do I worship? What are the habits of my life? (Liturgies are a fancy theological term for the rhythms of life.)⁶¹

These four questions are important because if we are not intentional, we'll be swept along thinking about what everyone else is thinking about, focused on what everyone else is focused on, loving what everyone else loves, and doing what everyone else is doing.

What specific habits should Christians pursue? Two are properly basic, in that without them it is difficult to keep our attention focused on God and his glory. We'll look at more habits in the next chapter when we look at how redeemed image bearing affects the way we love our neighbors as ourselves, but the following two habits are scripturally prescribed means of connecting with and loving God.

**Explore God's Word.** Charles Colson described the Bible this way:

> The Bible—banned, burned, beloved. More widely read, more frequently attacked than any other book in history. Generations of intellectuals have attempted to discredit it, dictators of every age have outlawed it and executed those who read it. Yet soldiers carry it into battle believing it more powerful than their weapons. Fragments of it smuggled into solitary prison cells have transformed ruthless killers into gentle saints.⁶²

In view of the incredible impact of the Bible through human history, we should take time each day to study it, embracing the opportunity to dip into the river of history itself, as nearly all great persons in the last two thousand years have. Skeptics and nonbelievers cannot figure out how their mockery and scorn shade the truth. As the famous theologian J. I. Packer said, "One of the many divine qualities of the Bible is this: that it does not yield its secrets to the irreverent and censorious."⁶³ Read the Bible not to defend or attack it but as a means of learning to love God.

**Pray.** The character of C. S. Lewis in the movie *Shadowlands*, when confronted with why he engaged in such an ineffectual and primitive practice as prayer, said, "I pray because I can't help myself. I pray because I'm helpless. I pray because the need flows out of me all

<!-- page-211 -->

the time—waking and sleeping. It doesn't change God—it changes me."⁶⁴ If you aren't sure what to pray, begin by turning to the book of Psalms, which includes many prayers, and pray them back to God. This will help you learn to cultivate, as David did, a heart after God.

### *Mercy*

The fourth communicable attribute of God is **mercy**. Agents of mercy bring blessing wherever they go. And because the gospel aims to bless all nations, those who embrace God's story are agents of mercy, embodying the gospel of grace and moving into the world as though arriving at a disaster with the gifts of a life-giving and truly healing remedy. We bring true *shalom*: peace, well-being, restoration. We bring more than rescue; we bring transformation. This is how we love our neighbors, and we will invest all of chapter 9 exploring how to do it better.

## 10. Conclusion

The gospel of God is not merely a plan by which we avoid hell but also a way to live differently now. Jesus said in Matthew 28:18–20 that all authority in heaven and on earth had been given to him and that, in response, his disciples would teach the nations to obey God. It's a clear covenantal statement of what the gospel is about: making disciples of the nations, baptizing them into the Trinity, and preparing them to obey God wherever Jesus has authority, which is to say *every area of life*. As Abraham Kuyper, a theologian who became prime minister of the Netherlands, famously stated, "There is not one square inch of the entire creation about which Jesus Christ does not cry out, 'This is mine! This belongs to me!'"⁶⁵

> **Jesus said in Matthew 28:18–20 that all authority in heaven and on earth had been given to him and that, in response, his disciples would teach the nations to obey God. It's a clear covenantal statement of what the gospel is about: making disciples of the nations, baptizing them into the Trinity, and preparing them to obey God wherever Jesus has authority, which is to say *every area of life*.**

C. S. Lewis, for one, grasped how profound of a shift the earthly ministry of Christ truly was in reconciling us with God and preparing us for an altogether different kind of life. As the Christ figure Aslan said in *The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe*, "When a willing victim who had committed no treachery was killed in a traitor's stead … even death itself would turn backwards."⁶⁶ It is like that in fact, not just in fiction: in Christ, death itself has turned backwards.

That death itself would turn backward is the hope in which Henry Wadsworth Longfellow rested in proclaiming that "God is not dead; nor doth he sleep." God wins. Death loses.
## Endnotes

1. Frank Sinatra, "I Heard the Bells on Christmas Day," recorded (1963), original lyrics by Henry Wadsworth Longfellow (1863), music by John Baptiste Calkin (1872).
2. Charles C. Calhoun, *Longfellow: A Rediscovered Life* (Boston: Beacon Press, 2004), 215.
3. Lucy Madison, "Holbrooke's Last Words: 'You've Got to Stop This War in Afghanistan,'" CBS News, December 14, 2010, www.cbsnews.com/8301-503544_162-20025587-503544.html.
4. Frank Sinatra's lyrics are only slightly different.
5. Richard John Neuhaus, "Telling the World Its Own Story" (lecture, The Wilberforce Forum, July 2001).
6. Alvin Plantinga, "Advice to Christian Philosophers," *Faith and Philosophy* 1 (July 1984): 264–65, cited in J. P. Moreland and Scott B. Rae, *Body and Soul: Human Nature and the Crisis in Ethics* (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity, 2000), 24.
7. See Moreland and Rae, *Body and Soul*.
8. J. R. Smythies, "Some Aspects of Consciousness," in *Beyond Reductionism: New Perspectives in the Life Sciences*, ed. Arthur Koestler and J. R. Smythies (London: Hutchinson Publishers, 1969), 251–52. For an updated discussion of identity, see J. P. Moreland and William Lane Craig, *Philosophical Foundations for a Christian Worldview* (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity, 2003), 290.
9. Moreland and Rae, *Body and Soul*, 17.
10. For more on "Brights," see www.the-brights.net.
11. Christian Smith, "Man: The Religious Animal," *First Things*, April 2012, www.firstthings.com/article/2012/03/man-the-religious-animal.
12. David F. Ruccio and Jack Amariglio, *Postmodern Moments in Modern Economics* (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2003), 167.
13. Ruccio and Amariglio, *Postmodern Moments*, 134.
14. Glenn Ward, *Teach Yourself Postmodernism*, 2nd ed. (Chicago: McGraw-Hill, 2003), 179.
15. Genesis 1:28: "God blessed them. And God said to them, 'Be fruitful and multiply and fill the earth and subdue it, and have dominion over the fish of the sea and over the birds of the heavens and over every living thing that moves on the earth.'"
16. BreakPoint interview with Drs. Kenneth Turner and Kathy Koch on "In His Image," June 21, 2013, www.breakpoint.org/features-columns/discourse/entry/15/22584.
17. Albert Wolters is professor emeritus at Redeemer University College, Ontario, Canada. His book is *Creation Regained: Biblical Basics for a Reformational Worldview* (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 2005), 46.
18. Barbara Christopher et al., *Modern Biology* (New York: Holt, Reinhart and Winston), 6–9.
19. Go to www.webmd.com and search "parasites" to find out everything you never wanted to know.
20. Wolters, *Creation Regained*, 46.
21. A. W. Tozer, *The Knowledge of the Holy* (New York: HarperCollins, 1961), 3–4.
22. James E. Marcia, "Identity in Adolescence" in *Handbook of Adolescent Psychology*, ed. J. Adelson (New York: Wiley, 1980), 159–87.
23. John 1:12: "To all who did receive him, who believed in his name, he gave the right to become children of God."
24. John 15:5: "I am the vine; you are the branches. Whoever abides in me and I in him, he it is that bears much fruit, for apart from me you can do nothing."
25. Romans 8:1: "There is therefore now no condemnation for those who are in Christ Jesus."
26. Romans 8:16–17: "The Spirit himself bears witness with our spirit that we are children of God, and if children, then heirs—heirs of God and fellow heirs with Christ, provided we suffer with him in order that we may also be glorified with him."
27. 1 Corinthians 6:17: "He who is joined to the Lord becomes one spirit with him."
28. 1 Corinthians 6:19–20: "Do you not know that your body is a temple of the Holy Spirit within you, whom you have from God? You are not your own, for you were bought with a price. So glorify God in your body."
29. 2 Corinthians 5:17: "If anyone is in Christ, he is a new creation. The old has passed away; behold, the new has come."
30. 2 Corinthians 5:21: "For our sake he made him to be sin who knew no sin, so that in him we might become the righteousness of God."
31. Galatians 2:20: "I have been crucified with Christ. It is no longer I who live, but Christ who lives in me. And the life I now live in the flesh I live by faith in the Son of God, who loved me and gave himself for me."
32. Ephesians 1:3: "Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us in Christ with every spiritual blessing in the heavenly places."
33. Ephesians 1:4: "He chose us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and blameless before him."
34. Colossians 2:7: "… rooted and built up in him and established in the faith, just as you were taught, abounding in thanksgiving."
35. Colossians 2:10: "You have been filled in him, who is the head of all rule and authority."
36. 2 Timothy 1:7: "God gave us a spirit not of fear but of power and love and self-control."
37. Hebrews 4:16: "Let us then with confidence draw near to the throne of grace, that we may receive mercy and find grace to help in time of need."
38. 2 Peter 1:4: "He has granted to us his precious and very great promises, so that through them you may become partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the corruption that is in the world because of sinful desire."
39. 1 John 5:18: "We know that everyone who has been born of God does not keep on sinning, but he who was born of God protects him, and the evil one does not touch him."
40. To sign up for a free copy of this report, go to turningthetide.net/.
41. Timothy Keller, *Counterfeit Gods: The Empty Promises of Money, Sex, and Power, and the Only Hope That Matters* (New York: Riverhead, 2011), 172.
42. Romans 2:4: "Do you presume on the riches of his kindness and forbearance and patience, not knowing that God's kindness is meant to lead you to repentance?"
43. Thomas Church Brownell, *The Family Prayer Book*, or the Book of Common Prayer (New York: Sydney's Press, 1823), 7.
44. Wolters, *Creation Regained*, 88.
45. For example, Philippians 1:17: "The former proclaim Christ out of selfish ambition, not sincerely but thinking to afflict me in my imprisonment"; Philippians 2:3: "Do nothing from selfish ambition or conceit, but in humility count others more significant than yourselves"; James 3:14: "If you have bitter jealousy and selfish ambition in your hearts, do not boast and be false to the truth"; James 3:16: "Where jealousy and selfish ambition exist, there will be disorder and every vile practice."
46. Mortimer Adler, "Chapter 101: Wisdom," in *The Great Ideas: A Syntopicon of Great Books of the Western World*, ed. Robert Maynard Hutchins and Mortimer Adler (Chicago: Benton, 1971), vol. 3 of 60 volumes, 938.
47. Plato, *The Republic*, trans. Benjamin Jowett (full text), classics.mit.edu/Plato/republic.mb.txt. See especially book 7 on the allegory of the cave.
48. Quoted in Robert Louis Wilken, *The Spirit of Early Christian Thought: Seeking the Face of God* (New Haven, CT: Yale University, 2003), 9.
49. Titus Lucretius Carus, *On the Nature of Things*, bk. 2, trans. William Ellery Leonard (full text), classics.mit.edu/Carus/nature_things.mb.txt.
50. Plotinus, "On Virtue," *The Six Enneads*, third tractate, trans. Stephen Mackenna and B. S. Page (full text), classics.mit.edu/Plotinus/enneads.mb.txt.
51. This is seen throughout the Old Testament. *Chokmah* is used in reference to the skilled craftsmen who built the temple in Exodus 35, those skilled in music (1 Kings 4:31–32) and performance (Jer. 9:17), strength of leadership (Deut. 34:9), magicians and soothsayers are considered wise men (Gen. 41:8; Isa. 44:25), and those who could make difficult judicial decisions (2 Sam. 14:17, 20; 19:27).
52. Peter J. Leithart, "No Heavenly Good," Leithart.com, June 25, 2007, www.leithart.com/archives/003113.php.
53. Ursula M. Staudinger and Monisha Pasupathi, "Correlates of Wisdom-Related Performance in Adolescence and Adulthood: Age-Graded Differences in 'Paths' toward Desirable Development," *Journal of Research on Adolescence* 13, no. 3 (2003): 240.
54. Lars Tornstam, "Gerotranscendence: The Contemplative Dimension of Aging," *Journal of Aging Studies* 11, no. 2 (1997): 143–54.
55. John Mayer, "Why, Georgia?," on *Room for Squares*, Columbia Records, 2001, compact disc.
56. Thao N. Le, "Age Differences in Spirituality, Mystical Experiences and Wisdom," *Aging & Society* 28 (2008): 383–411.
57. There are two main categories of ethical theories. Aristotle's focus on human flourishing is called a "teleological" theory, the end of which is a good life. A second category is the "deontological" theory, which focuses on "oughtness," or duty. For more, see John Deigh, *An Introduction to Ethics*, *Cambridge Introductions to Philosophy* (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2010), 14. As my coauthor David Noebel and I point out originally in *Understanding the Times*, a true theory of ethics ought to be able to be lived by human beings in a sinful world where the right is not always obvious and not always easy to live out. A true theory of ethics must give us a way to decide, without guidance from the authorities, that not everything legal is right and that an unjust law has no purpose if it defies the law of God. A true theory of ethics must take into account a higher law if lower laws are not to tyrannize us. Christianity, though not fitting neatly into either teleological or deontological categories, helps resolve these dilemmas.
58. Aristotle, *Nicomachean Ethics*, trans. W. D. Ross (full text), classics.mit.edu/Aristotle/nicomachaen.mb.txt.
59. Despite its inadequacies, Aristotle's philosophy was very compelling to early Christian thinkers. One of them, Thomas Aquinas (1227–1274), wrote extensively on how to apply Aristotelian logic to Christian principles.
60. John Burnaby, ed., *Augustine: Later Works*, The Library of Christian Classics (Philadelphia: Westminster, 1956), 336.
61. "A Worldview That's Big Enough," *Christian Worldview Journal*, www.colsoncenter.org/the-center/columns/changepoint/15359-a-worldview-thats-qbig-enoughq.
62. Charles Colson, *Loving God* (Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 1996), 55.
63. J. I. Packer, *God Has Spoken: Revelation and the Bible* (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker, 1979), 44.
64. *Shadowlands*, directed by Richard Attenborough (Price Entertainment, 1993), DVD.
65. Abraham Kuyper, *Near unto God: Daily Meditations Adapted for Contemporary Christians* by James C. Schaap (Grand Rapids, MI: CRC Publications, 1997), 7.
66. C. S. Lewis, *The Chronicles of Narnia: The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe* (New York: HarperCollins, 1994), 94.
