<!-- page-243 -->
# Chapter 10: Is God Christian?

## 1. God: A Cultural Phenomenon?

Bishop Desmond Tutu, one of the most respected religious leaders in the world, is known primarily for his work in South Africa to end *apartheid* ("apartness"), South Africa's bungled and painful attempt to resolve racial tension. After apartheid was abolished, Tutu headed the Truth and Reconciliation Commission to bring healing among racial groups.

> **Apartheid:** government-enforced racial segregation.

<!-- page-244 -->

Although Tutu is an Anglican bishop, his most recent thinking shows that he has real doubts about whether Christianity is true for all people, at all times, and in all cultures. In *God Is Not a Christian*, he writes,

> The accidents of birth and geography determine to a very large extent to what faith we belong.... Perhaps ... we should not succumb too easily to the temptation to exclusivity and dogmatic claims to a monopoly of the truth of our particular faith. You could so easily have been an adherent of the faith that you are now denigrating, but for the fact that you were born here rather than there.<sup>1</sup>

In other words, Tutu is saying that because people can't help which religion they were raised in, we cannot say it would be better for them to be Christian instead of the way they were raised. By using such words as *exclusivity* and *dogmatic* and *monopoly*, Tutu implies that to believe otherwise is unthinking, rude, and perhaps even cruel.

For many, Tutu's insight is self-evidently true. A person growing up in Thailand is likely to be Buddhist and would therefore reject the idea of a personal creator. But does this mean that no such personal creator exists or that his existence depends on our understanding? And if he does in fact exist, are all people in all cultures at all times bound to acknowledge and respond to him?

These questions are not to be taken lightly, nor are the concerns of such a respected figure as Bishop Tutu. In this chapter, we'll explore whether it's reasonable to believe that God, as he is described in the Bible, actually exists. We'll ask, Can we know that he is more than just a human invention, born out of cultural and environmental forces? Is there sufficient evidence for the God of the Bible available to those who seek it?

The Bible suggests that God has revealed himself in a way that goes beyond our cultural biases and perspectives. But many people resist understanding. They raise objections, such as, If God made everything, who made God? Why do we need God when unbelievers can live just as moral lives as believers (or even better)? Isn't religious truth just a cultural preference?

In this chapter, we'll take a look at some of the evidence for God's existence, and then we'll examine each of these objections in turn to see whether it is reasonable to deny God's existence as he is revealed in the Bible.

## 2. Evidence of God Is Clearly Seen

The Bible says that certain things about God can be known outside of the Bible, through **general revelation**, which refers to ways God has made himself known through creation. It includes:

> **General Revelation:** God's universal revelation about himself (Ps. 19:1–6; Rom. 1:18–20) and morality (2:14–15) that can be obtained through nature.

<!-- page-245 -->

- **God is great in power; he is deity.** Romans 1:19–20 says, "What can be known about God is plain to them, because God has shown it to them. For his invisible attributes, namely, his eternal power and divine nature, have been clearly perceived, ever since the creation of the world, in the things that have been made. So they are without excuse."
- **God is a designer.** Psalm 19:1 speaks of his universal craftsmanship: "The heavens declare the glory of God, and the sky above proclaims his handiwork."
- **God has written his law on our hearts.** Romans 2:14–15 says, "When Gentiles, who do not have the law, by nature do what the law requires, they are a law to themselves, even though they do not have the law. They show that the work of the law is written on their hearts, while their conscience also bears witness, and their conflicting thoughts accuse or even excuse them."

As Bruce Demarest says, "While not imparting truths necessary for salvation—such as the Trinity, the incarnation, or the atonement—general revelation conveys the conviction that God exists and that he is transcendent, immanent, self-sufficient, eternal, powerful, good and a hater of evil."<sup>2</sup>

In other words, people who have never read a Bible can know a great deal about God, the same God who is revealed in the Bible. This makes the argument that it is culturally insensitive to speak of God as being both real and really important less than convincing. No one needs to be 100 percent certain of God's existence; complete certainty is impossible. All it takes is good reason to believe he exists. So are there good reasons to believe there is a God? Let's begin by looking at the evidence of the physical universe.

## 3. Cosmological Argument: Explaining the Existence of the Universe

> **Cosmology:** the study of the structure, origin, and design of the universe.

Cosmology is the study of the order, structure, and design of the universe. There is more than one version of the **cosmological argument** for God, but they all say that the universe could not be without God. Everything that exists has an explanation for its existence. The universe obviously exists. The only sufficient explanation for its existence is God.

> **Cosmological Argument (aka Casual Argument):** an argument for God's existence that begins with the premise that something caused the universe to exist and ends with the conclusion that God is the best explanation for the existence of the universe.

Philosopher Gottfried Wilhelm von Leibniz (1646–1716) was an early modern proponent of the cosmological argument. His brilliance was unquestionable. The co-discoverer of calculus, Leibniz also made major contributions in physics, philosophy, probability theory, medicine, psychology, linguistics, and even geology. In addition to science, he wrote books in fields as diverse as theology and law, and wrote fluently in Latin as well as in German and French. It was Leibniz who refined the binary number system and thus prepared the way for the invention of computers—three hundred years before it actually happened.

Leibniz thought a lot about how we can make statements such as "God exists." For such a statement to be thinkable, there must be a concept of existence with actual, identifiable properties. It occurred to Leibniz that whether or not the statement "God exists" is true, the very

<!-- page-246 -->

fact that we can think such concepts means that something exists, as concepts are something rather than nothing. But why is there something rather than nothing? There's no reason this had to be the case. Someone must have made it happen intentionally.

To be a little more detailed, the cosmological argument says that God is a necessary being—a being that exists by necessity of his own nature. The universe, on the other hand, has a contingent existence: it could have failed to exist and so needs a cause external to itself to explain why it exists.<sup>4</sup> The cosmological argument for God says that all existence has an explanation and that this explanation is God.

Furthermore, in God's nature, we must find an explanation of what we know to exist. Thought, creativity, and personality exist; therefore, God must be something more than a thoughtless, impersonal force.<sup>5</sup>

William Lane Craig offers a helpful analogy:

> Imagine that you're hiking through the woods and you come across a translucent ball lying on the forest floor. You would naturally wonder how it came to be there. If one of your hiking partners said to you, "Hey, it just exists inexplicably. Don't worry about it!" you'd either think that he was crazy or figure that he just wanted you to keep moving. No one would take seriously the suggestion that the ball existed there with literally no explanation. Now suppose you increase the size of the ball in this story so that it's the size of a car. That wouldn't do anything to satisfy or remove the demand for an explanation. Suppose it were the size of a house. Same problem. Suppose it were the size of a continent or a planet. Same problem. Suppose it were the size of the entire universe. Same problem. Merely increasing the size of the ball does nothing to affect the need of an explanation.<sup>6</sup>

The universe needs an explanation. Christians say that the explanation must be outside of the universe itself because things can't cause themselves to come into being. The cosmological argument says that the universe exists, that everything that exists has an explanation of its existence, and that the explanation of the universe's existence is God. The cosmological argument says that only God's existence can explain why there is something rather than nothing.

## 4. Kalam Cosmological Argument: Explaining the Cause of the Universe

> **Kalam Cosmological Argument:** an argument for God's existence that begins with the premise that something caused the universe to exist and ends with the conclusion that God is the best explanation for that cause.

The **kalam cosmological argument** was developed by Islamic philosophers in the twelfth century who sought to explain how they could know about the supernatural when our tools of understanding seem to work only inside of nature.<sup>7</sup> The argument says that whatever begins to exist has a cause, the universe began to exist, so therefore it must have a cause. That cause is God.

For most of recorded history, most philosophers and scientists have believed that the universe is eternal, having no cause. It has simply always existed, they believed, just like God himself. Aristotle believed this. He thought

<!-- page-247 -->

that everything that comes into existence had to have come from something and that if we were to go back in time, we would find everything came from something else, all the way back. There was never a beginning to this: the universe is static and unchanging and has always been this way.<sup>8</sup>

> **General Theory of Relativity:** Albert Einstein's geometric theory of gravitation, which proposes that space and time are interwoven and can be curved by the presence of massive objects, such as planets and black holes.

In the twentieth century, though, new advances made it possible to study the universe's origin from a scientific standpoint. Albert Einstein, in developing his **general theory of relativity**, began to realize that the universe was not static but was either expanding or contracting. If it was doing either of these things, it would point strongly to a moment in time in which the universe actually began.

Much of Einstein's thinking was affirmed by the work of astronomer Edwin Hubble, who showed that galaxies are moving farther away from Earth and that the farther they are from Earth, the faster they're moving. This is known as **Hubble's Law**, which he discovered through the phenomenon of **red shift**, in which the light from an object moves toward the red end of the color spectrum as it moves away from us and its wavelengths lengthen. The implication that the universe is expanding led to the development of what we call the **big bang theory**.

> **Hubble's Law:** based on Edwin Hubble's astronomical observations; the law that states that the universe is expanding, i.e., the galaxies within the universe are moving away from one another at a rate directly proportional to the distances between galaxies.

> **Red Shift:** the expansion of the frequency of light toward the red end of the electromagnetic spectrum.

> **Big Bang Theory:** the theory that the universe arose around fourteen billion years ago from an extremely dense state that rapidly expanded and continues to expand today.

Think of an expanding balloon, and then think of what its expansion would look like played in reverse. At some point, it had to have started expanding. The expanding universe, played backward, leads to the same conclusion, except scientists think that at its earliest moment it was much, much smaller (and way more energy filled!) than a balloon.

Many Christians view the big bang as hostile to Christianity, but others are more accepting. Christian apologist Frank Turek, for example, says, "I don't have a problem with the Big Bang because I know who 'banged' it."<sup>9</sup> Interestingly, the famous atheist philosopher Antony Flew, who became a theist later in life, said it was his understanding of the big bang that made him realize that the universe probably had a beginning and that if it had a beginning, it probably had a cause: God. Here's how Flew phrased it:

> When I first met the big-bang theory as an atheist, it seemed to me the theory made a big difference because it suggested that the universe had a beginning and that the first sentence in Genesis ("In the beginning, God created the heavens and the earth")

<!-- page-248 -->

> was related to an event in the universe. As long as the universe could be comfortably thought to be not only without end but also without beginning, it remained easy to see its existence (and its most fundamental features) as brute facts. And if there had been no reason to think the universe had a beginning, there would be no need to postulate something else that produced the whole thing. But the big-bang theory changed all that. If the universe had a beginning, it becomes entirely sensible, almost inevitable, to ask what produced this beginning.<sup>10</sup>

Today, virtually every scientist, or at least almost every physicist, believes that the universe had a beginning.<sup>11</sup> The kalam cosmological argument builds on this understanding and speculates about what brought the universe into existence. Here's how the argument goes, as Craig states it:

> Whatever begins to exist has a cause.
> The universe began to exist.
> Therefore, the universe has a cause.<sup>12</sup>

The claim "Whatever begins to exist has a cause" seems pretty solid. After all, it's self-evident that physical objects don't just pop into existence without a cause. If they did, we wouldn't be able to conduct successful scientific experiments because we would never know whether our experiment or some random factor caused the effects we observe. It's also clear that nothing can cause itself to begin to exist; in order to do that, it would have to exist before it existed! There are, of course, people who deny that everything that begins has a cause, but they have to pay a high rational price for this belief. They are denying the logic we use to make sense of the material universe.

> **Second Law of Thermodynamics:** a scientific law that states that the amount of usable energy in a closed system will decrease over time.

The second premise, "The universe began to exist," rests on solid ground as well. Einstein's general theory of relativity (that the universe isn't static) and Hubble's red shift (the galaxies are all moving away from each other in every direction) offer evidence for it. Moreover, as J. P. Moreland observes, there is evidence from the **second law of thermodynamics**, which

> in one form states that the amount of useful energy in the universe is being used up. If the universe were infinitely old, it would already have used up all its useful energy and have arrived at a temperature of absolute zero. Since there are many pockets of useful energy (for example, the sun), the universe must be finite in duration. Therefore, there was a beginning when the universe's useful energy was put into it "from the outside."<sup>13</sup>

To be sure, such evidence doesn't prove that the Bible or Christianity is true or that Jesus is God. But it does indicate that the universe was made and that there was a maker.

As authors Sean McDowell and Jonathan Morrow put it,

<!-- page-249 -->

The Kalam helps narrow the range of possible causes to a being that is nonphysical, spaceless, timeless, changeless, and powerful: If matter began to exist at the moment of creation, then the matter's cause must be nonphysical, or spiritual. Since space itself came into existence at the big bang, space's cause must be spaceless. Since time began at the moment of the big bang, time's cause must be timeless. Since change is a product of time, time's cause must also be changeless.<sup>14</sup>

The amount of energy in the universe is powerful. The amount of matter in the universe is immense. The cause of this power and immensity must be immensely powerful. The kalam cosmological argument says the cause is God.

### An Objection to Cosmological Arguments

"If God made the universe, who made God?" You can respond to this common objection by pointing out that the cosmological argument does not claim that *everything* has a cause but that everything that had a *beginning* had a cause. That simply doesn't apply to God, who is a necessary being and therefore without beginning.

Besides that, the one who raises that objection is putting himself into a quandary: if everything needs a cause, and if there is no God, what caused the universe? To say that *everything* had a cause leads to an infinite cycle of cause and effect that could never have a beginning. If there never was a beginning, we could never have reached the point in which you are currently reading this sentence. There must be one eternal uncaused causer, or nothing would have ever come into existence.

> **Quantum Physics:** the branch of physics dealing with physical phenomena on the subatomic level, where particles behave in a fashion difficult to quantify and understand using the scientific method.

Some scientists today, though, are saying that the universe can create itself. Stephen Hawking, whom some consider the greatest scientist alive, says that certain laws of gravity are all that's necessary for the universe to have created itself from nothing.<sup>15</sup> Quantum physics shows that it's possible for particles—real atomic matter—to emerge out of a pure vacuum.

The problem, though, is that a vacuum isn't really "nothing," and neither are the laws of physics. It takes energy in a vacuum to produce particles, and that's not nothing. Plus, a vacuum requires space, which isn't nothing either. All of these, including the laws of physics, are as contingent (depending for their existence on things they cannot themselves explain) as everything else in the universe. None of them could be the ultimate explanation that has to stand behind and before every contingent thing.

> **Design Argument (aka Teleological Argument):** an argument for God's existence that begins with the premise that design requires an intelligent designer and ends with the conclusion that God is the best explanation for the observable design within the universe.

## 5. The Design Argument: Explaining the Physical Order of the Universe

<!-- page-250 -->

The **design argument** says the world appears to be the product of design and that a designed universe requires an intelligent designer. That designer is God. One important early version of this, from Thomas Aquinas, takes the very simple approach of pointing out that design is apparent to everyone everywhere in almost everything we see. To deny that the world is designed is to deny the obvious, Aquinas said.<sup>16</sup>

> **Intelligent Design:** the study of information, complexity, and design in life and the cosmos; the theory that life could not have arisen by chance and random natural processes but was designed by an intelligent being.

More recently, the design argument has come up in another form, **intelligent design** (ID). Before getting to the particular evidence, it will be helpful to discuss what ID is. Perhaps William Dembski, one of ID's founders, has the best explanation. Dembski is a scientist and philosopher who holds master's degrees in statistics, mathematics, philosophy, and theology and doctoral degrees in mathematics and philosophy. He has conducted postdoctoral research at Princeton University and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. About ID, Dembski asks and answers,

> Is that radio signal from outer space just random noise or the result of an alien intelligence? Is that chunk of rock just a random chunk of rock or an arrowhead? Is Mount Rushmore the result of wind and erosion or the creative act of an artist? We ask such questions all the time, and we think we can give good answers to them. Yet, when it comes to biology and cosmology, scientists balk at even raising such questions, much less answering them in favor of design. This is especially true of biology. According to well-known evolutionist Francisco Ayala, Darwin's greatest achievement was to show how the organized complexity of organisms could be attained without a designing intelligence. By contrast, ID purports to find patterns in biological systems that signify intelligence. ID therefore directly challenges Darwinism and other materialistic approaches to the origin and evolution of life.<sup>17</sup>

When we look around, we see things that exist, such as rocks, trees, and water. We see events occur, such as the sun rising and rain falling. We notice that some things are constant, such as the law of gravity and, given certain conditions, the point at which water freezes. What are we to make of such observations? How could they happen? First, they could be the result of law, that is, they had to be this way; second, they could be the result of chance accident; or third, they could be the product of design.

Imagine standing at the bottom of the Grand Canyon, gazing at the many eerily beautiful rock formations. You would recognize these formations as the outworking of natural laws resulting in certain water flows and environmental conditions that erode some of the rock, leaving unusual shapes. Now imagine standing at the base of Mount Rushmore, noticing how the rock formation bears a definite resemblance to four US presidents: George Washington, Thomas Jefferson, Teddy Roosevelt, and Abraham Lincoln. You would immediately realize

<!-- page-251 -->

that this was not caused by erosion. Except by design, faces do not appear on mountainsides in such recognizable detail.

So how can we tell whether something has resulted from law, chance, or design? Thomas Aquinas's answer would be something like, "Do you even need to ask if Mount Rushmore was designed? Isn't it obvious?" Still, when it comes to biological systems, evolutionary scientists have asked the question anyway. According to Dembski, the test for design is **specified complexity**.

> **Specified Complexity:** any event that is contingent and complex, and exhibits an independently given pattern.

An event exhibits specified complexity if it is contingent and therefore not necessary, if it is complex and therefore not readily reproducible by chance, and if it is specified in the sense of exhibiting an independently given pattern. Note that a merely improbable event is not sufficient to eliminate chance—flip a coin long enough and you'll witness a highly complex or improbable event. Even so, you'll have no reason not to attribute it to chance. The important thing about specifications is that they be objectively given and not just imposed on events after the fact. For instance, if an archer fires arrows into a wall, and then we paint bull's-eyes around them, we impose a pattern after the fact. On the other hand, if the targets are set up in advance ("specified"), and then the archer hits them accurately, we know it was by design.<sup>18</sup>

Let's take a look at three ways specified complexity manifests itself: fine-tuning, the privileged planet, and biological information.

### Fine-Tuning

The physical constants in the universe are extremely fine-tuned. Fine-tuning is not the same thing as design; it just means that if any of the variables that permit life to exist were, as Craig puts it, "to be altered by a hair's breadth, the delicate balance required for the existence of life would be upset and the universe would be life-prohibiting instead."<sup>19</sup>

Robin Collins, a professor at Messiah College, is trained in both physics and philosophy. In *The Case for a Creator*, Lee Strobel relates a conversation with Collins about fine-tuning:

> "Let's talk about gravity," [Collins] said. "Imagine a ruler, or one of those old-fashioned linear radio dials, that goes all the way across the universe. It would be broken down into one-inch increments, which means there would be billions upon billions upon billions of inches. The entire dial represents the range of force strengths in nature, with gravity being the weakest force and the strong nuclear force that binds protons and neutrons together in the nuclei being the strongest, a whopping ten thousand billion billion billion billion times stronger than gravity. The range of possible settings for the force of gravity can plausibly be taken to be at least as large as the total range of force strengths. Now, let's imagine that you want to move the dial from where it's currently set. Even if you were to move it by only one inch, the impact on life in the universe would be catastrophic."<sup>20</sup>

<!-- page-252 -->

In a different location, Collins continued,

> Each of the four fundamental forces of nature had to be carefully fine-tuned for life: gravity, electromagnetism, the strong nuclear force, and the weak nuclear force. In particular, the ratio of the electromagnetic force to the gravitational force must be delicately balanced to one part in 10<sup>40</sup> (that's one part in 10,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000). If the ratio varied even slightly, then our universe would not have small and large stars, which are both necessary for a planet to sustain life. How delicate a balance is this? Imagine covering one billion continents the size of North America with coins. Stack the coins in columns that reach to the moon. Paint one coin red and place it in one of the columns. Blindfold a friend and have her attempt to pick it out. The odds are roughly 1 in 10<sup>40</sup> that she will.<sup>21</sup>

These probabilities are so infinitesimal that it is very hard to imagine such things occurring by chance. In fact, if you think you can imagine them happening by chance, that means you haven't understood how small the probabilities are. Even Paul Davies, a physicist who claims not to be a Christian, says, "It is hard to resist the impression that the present structure of the universe, apparently so sensitive to minor alterations in numbers, has been rather carefully thought out.... The seemingly miraculous concurrence of these numerical values must remain the most compelling evidence for cosmic design."<sup>22</sup>

### The Privileged Planet

We seem to live on a "privileged planet," according to authors Guillermo Gonzalez and Jay W. Richards. The planet itself, to paraphrase physicist Freeman Dyson, seems to have known we were coming. As Gonzalez and Richards put it,

> If you were a cosmic chef, your recipe for cooking up a habitable planet would have many ingredients. You would need a rocky planet large enough to hold on to a substantial atmosphere and oceans of water and to retain internal heat for billions of years. You would need the right kind of atmosphere. You would need a large moon to stabilize the tilt of the planet's rotation on its axis. You would need the planet to have a nearly circular orbit around a main sequence star similar to our sun. You would need to give that planet the right kind of planetary neighbors within its star system. And you would need to put that system far from the center, edges, and spiral arms of a galaxy like the Milky Way. You would need to cook it during a narrow window of time in the history of the universe. And so on. This is a partial list, but you get the idea.<sup>23</sup>

And not only is our planet fine-tuned for life but, as Gonzalez and Richards go on to say, we also seem to have been placed in an excellent location for making observations about the rest of the universe. It appears that the Creator wanted us to be discoverers.

<!-- page-253 -->

### Biological Information

Biological information appears to have been designed. When we look at the complexity of DNA, we see that it is full of information. Only rational minds produce information. Francis Collins, the scientist who led the team to map the human genome, delightfully explains the awesome complexity of DNA:

> Bacteria have DNA. Yeast have DNA. So do porcupines, peaches, and people. It is the universal language of all living things.... All of the DNA of an organism is called its genome, and the size of the genome is commonly expressed as the number of base pairs it contains. Think of the twisted helix of DNA as a ladder.... The simplest free-living single-cell organism, such as bacteria, generally pack all their information into a genome of a few million base pairs. Fancier multicellular organisms with more complex body plans require larger genomes to specify those functions. Our own genome stacks up as 3.1 billion rungs of the DNA ladder.<sup>24</sup>

Philosopher Douglas Groothuis further points out that DNA contains genetic information, an example of specified complexity. And only intelligence, not chance, can produce such information.<sup>25</sup> Because DNA isn't a product of necessity (that is, it's scientifically and logically conceivable to think of a world without it) and because DNA could not have been produced by mere chance, it is therefore reasonable to infer design.

Whether we're talking about design on a very large or very small scale, the formal argument for design is the same:

- Design requires a designer.
- The universe exhibits design.
- Therefore, the universe was designed by an intelligent designer.

### Two Objections to the Design Argument

"The multiverse would explain away fine-tuning." Scientists such as Max Tegmark and Brian Greene have proposed what they consider to be a possible solution to the incredible odds against life arising from chance processes in this universe: the **multiverse theory**. If there were, in fact, many universes rather than just one, then the chances of life arising in at least one of them would seem to be much greater. Some theories in physics seem to say there might actually be a vast number of different universes, each of them with different histories and even different physical laws. But as William Lane Craig points out,

> **Multiverse Theory:** a theoretical reality that postulates an infinite set of parallel and diverse universes, of which our own universe is just one instantiation.

<!-- page-254 -->

In order to be scientifically credible, some plausible mechanism must be suggested for generating the many worlds. But if the many worlds hypothesis is to attributing fine-tuning to chance alone, then the mechanism that generates the many worlds had better not be fine-tuned itself! For if it is, then the problem arises all over again: How do you explain the fine-tuning of the multiverse?<sup>26</sup>

Not only that, but no scientist has ever proposed a way we could check and find out if these other universes actually exist. The physical theories behind them are very far from being proved, and many people are quite sure they could never be proved, at least by any science anyone can imagine. That means that multiverse theory is little more than a guess, and it almost looks like a guess that some people have made in order to avoid believing in a designer. One cosmologist said it clearly: "If there is only one universe you might have to have a fine-tuner. If you don't want God, you'd better have a multiverse."<sup>27</sup>

"Design does not require a designer." Scientists keep on proposing new theories, attempting to explain how things that appear to be designed could have arisen by chance processes. But multiverse theory makes assumptions about the world and about information that are reasonable only if, in fact, things that appear to be designed actually are.

The other major objection to the design argument comes through evolutionary theory. In his 1996 book *The Blind Watchmaker: Why the Evidence of Evolution Reveals a Universe without Design*, famed atheist Richard Dawkins admits that everything in biology appears designed, but he says that whether something appears designed is something we can ascertain only after the fact, like detectives coming upon a crime scene.<sup>28</sup> Yet every time Dawkins attempts his own detective work—namely, to try to prove that such design could have emerged from natural selection and random mutations—he does so, as advocate for intelligent design Stephen Meyer points out, by smuggling in "the guiding hand of an intelligent agent."<sup>29</sup>

For example, when Dawkins tries to show that a computer program could randomly come up with a phrase from Shakespeare, he ignores the fact that he himself has designed the program and that the statement the program "arrived" at is a meaningful one.<sup>30</sup> Dawkins, in effect, accuses creationists of stacking the deck himself.

Evolutionary theory still faces formidable obstacles, however, in explaining the specified complexity found in living things everywhere. It has not yet actually shown in any detail, either, how one species can evolve into another, more complex one. Evolutionary theorists assume it must happen, but after decades of work, they have never shown that it does or how it could.<sup>31</sup>

> **Moral Argument (aka Axiological Argument):** an argument for God's existence that begins with the premise that objective morality exists and ends with the conclusion that God is the best explanation for the existence of an objective morality.

## 6. The Moral Argument: Explaining the Moral Order of the Universe

The **moral argument** for God's existence says that the existence of **objective morality** provides good

<!-- page-255 -->

evidence for the existence of God. Not everyone agrees with this, obviously. Science-fiction writer Glen Cook writes, "More evil gets done in the name of righteousness than any other way."<sup>32</sup> But in order to know this, he must first have a sense of what good and evil, righteousness and unrighteousness, actually are. Where does such a sense come from? Cook denies the existence of God and revelation, but he still recognizes that things are not as they ought to be, that injustice occurs, that bad things happen.

> **Objective Morality:** the belief that morality has a universal and unchanging standard that is independent from human opinion, culture, and sentiment.

But is this sense of oughtness just personal preference? Imagine a person saying, "It's not wrong to torture puppies for fun; it's just not my thing, so I prefer to not do it." Would we consider this to be a valid viewpoint? What would we think of the idea that it's just a matter of personal preference? Most of us would say that's the wrong way to see it. We have a firm and confident sense that torturing puppies is wrong and that personal preference doesn't decide the answer.

Everyone engages in moral thinking. Everyone seems to have a sense of what's right and wrong, of what's good and evil. Everyone seems to view right and wrong as being objectively real. "Objectively real," in this case, means that rightness and wrongness depend on something far deeper and more solid than human opinion.

Therefore, there seems to be a firm foundation for an argument for God's existence that goes like this:

- If objective moral values and duties exist, then God exists.
- Objective moral values and duties exist.
- Therefore, God exists.

Let's look at premise one first: If objective moral values and duties exist, then God exists. The moral law (another way of speaking about moral values and duties) makes sense in the light of God's existence in the same way that speed-limit signs make sense in light of the existence of lawmakers and police. As Sean McDowell and Jonathan Morrow put it, "If God exists, then objective morality is a natural and reasonable inference to make. There seems to be a natural connection between the idea of God as a moral lawgiver and the fact that there is an objective moral law that humans can either violate or obey."<sup>33</sup>

Some people reject God's necessary connection to moral principles, proposing instead a Darwinian explanation for human morality. But this is problematic for several reasons. First, morality is about how we *should* behave. Even if it adequately explains why we behaved a certain way in the past, it cannot explain how we *ought* to behave in the future. In other words, it *describes* but can't *prescribe*. It doesn't even provide a sound basis for saying that it's good that we got to this point in our history!

A morality that is descriptive but not prescriptive could be ignored. Who cares what helped people evolve in the past? Why shouldn't we just do what we want and then work to be sure we survive anyway? When it comes to morality, we need prescription, not just

<!-- page-256 -->

description. Plus, moral principles that came about through evolution would always be arbitrary. William Lane Craig explains:

> The most popular form of atheism is naturalism, which holds that the only things that exist are the things described by our best scientific theories. But science is morally neutral; you can't find moral values in a test tube. It follows immediately that moral values don't really exist; they're just illusions of human beings. Even if the atheist is willing to go beyond the bounds of science, why think, given an atheistic worldview, that human beings are morally valuable? On a naturalistic view moral values are just the by-product of biological evolution and social conditioning. Just as a troop of baboons exhibit cooperative and even self-sacrificial behavior because natural selection has determined it to be advantageous in the struggle for survival, so their primate cousins Homo sapiens exhibit similar behavior for the same reason. As a result of sociobiological pressures there has evolved among Homo sapiens a sort of "herd morality," which functions well in the perpetuation of our species. But on the atheistic view there doesn't seem to be anything about Homo sapiens that makes this morality objectively true. If we were to rewind the film of human evolution back to the beginning and start anew, people with a very different set of moral values might well have evolved.<sup>34</sup>

A second objection to the idea that evolution explains morality is the existence of strong similarities in moral codes across cultures. If cultures and societies evolved independently of each other, it is difficult to imagine how countless cultures could have all independently evolved the same moral code. Yet this is precisely what we have: moral commonality across time and societies.

Third, evolution is interested in survival. Yet actions that yield the best chances for survival are not the same as moral actions. Consider altruistic acts. We've all seen people take actions that risk their own survival in order to rescue someone whose survival does not affect their own in any way. Such unselfish acts diminish the rescuer's chance of survival, yet are considered moral.

Now let's look at premise two: Objective moral values and duties do exist. Whenever we claim that someone's action is right or wrong, we are making a moral judgment. Often our judgment is just expressing a preference: "It's wrong of you to hum while you're doing your homework because you are distracting me from doing mine." On the other hand, the statement "It's wrong to steal a person's homework and turn it in to the professor claiming it as one's own" proposes an objective moral value that should be applied, even if stealing is fashionable these days or even if professors don't think it's a big deal. The Nazi Holocaust in Germany, in which millions of innocent people were slaughtered by men wanting to "purify" the nation, was objectively wrong even while many Germans were in agreement that it was just fine.

Still, some reject the idea of objective moral truths by claiming that morality is relative to one's personal or cultural situation. Not only non-Christians make this claim. According to pollster George Barna, more than half of born-again Christians are moral relativists.<sup>35</sup> But **moral relativism** is a breathtakingly naive view to hold. Doug Groothuis explains:

> **Moral Relativism:** the belief that morality is relative to, or defined by, the individual or culture.

<!-- page-257 -->

> Relativism, both cultural and individual, entails that no human act is intrinsically and always wrong. Yet consider these statements: 1. It is always wrong to torture the innocent merely for pleasure. 2. Rape is always wrong. 3. Female genital mutilation is always wrong. If relativism is true, then statements 1–3 cannot be true, since they make absolute, universal and objective moral claims. Therefore, relativism is refuted by a simple modus tollens argument, which can be illustrated by using any one of the previous three statements.<sup>36</sup>

What kind of world would it be, Groothuis wonders, if moral relativism were true? Francis Beckwith and Gregory Koukl respond,

> It would be a world in which nothing was wrong—nothing is considered evil or good, nothing worthy of praise or blame. It would be a world in which justice and fairness are meaningless concepts, in which there would be no accountability, no possibility of moral improvement, no moral discourse.<sup>37</sup>

No one would want to live in a world like that. But the only way for moral values to be timeless and absolute is if they have a timeless and absolute source. A timeless, absolute moral lawgiver is just what God is described to be in the Bible. This is how the moral argument comes to the conclusion that God must exist.

But there is more. Objective moral values must also derive from a personal source. Let's say I have a program that causes my computer to shout, "Get back to work!" when it senses a five-minute pause in my typing. It would be irrational to think of the computer as having generated the program on its own. It would be equally irrational to think I owed my computer a duty to type. A person would have had to have programmed it, and if there were any duty to keep typing, it would be a duty I owed to some person. Moral values, in order to be personal and thoughtful, must have a personal and thoughtful source. As professor of philosophy Paul Copan puts it,

> A personal, self-aware, purposeful, good God provides the natural and necessary context for the existence of valuable, rights-bearing, morally responsible human persons. That is, personhood and morality are necessarily connected; moral values are rooted in personhood. Without God (a personal being), no persons—and thus no moral values—would exist at all: no personhood, no moral values. Only if God exists can moral properties be realized.<sup>38</sup>

### Two Objections to the Moral Argument

"Objective morality doesn't exist." It's easy to say there's no objective morality, but very few people would deny that horrifying acts of evil, such as the Nazi Holocaust, were objectively wrong. Very few people would let a stranger walk out of the coffee shop with their computer without saying, "Hey, stealing is wrong." Very few people would deny that giving loving care and nurture to one's children is the right way to treat them.

Occasionally, you'll run into stubborn people who continue to insist—even when given such examples as the Holocaust, caring for children, or even the theft of their own

<!-- page-258 -->

computer—that even though we like the idea of objective morals, they simply do not exist. Usually, though, such people hold to moral relativism, not because they actually believe it but because it helps them feel more comfortable with their disbelief in God. When push comes to shove, though, if someone walks out of the coffee shop with their laptop, they're still going to shout, "That's wrong!"

"Atheists can live good lives without believing in God." Skeptics and atheists often raise this objection, but it only shows that they've misunderstood the moral argument. The issue isn't whether atheists can be *moral* but whether atheism can *explain* morality. Of course atheists can live according to objectively good moral values while denying God's existence. Atheists can obey traffic laws, love their children, care for their neighbors, and stand against injustice. But as William Lane Craig notes, "The question is not about the necessity of belief in God for objective morality but about the necessity of the *existence* of God for objective morality."<sup>39</sup> Atheists may deny God's existence and live moral lives, but they can do so only in a world of objective morality explained by God's existence. It's like denying the existence of bakers while stuffing one's mouth with delicious puff pastry.

There are people who believe that the cosmological, design, and moral arguments persuasively demonstrate God's existence and yet still feel uncomfortable accepting the Bible's more specific claim that what it says about who God is and what he wants us to be is true for everyone. How do we respond to this objection?

## 7. But Isn't Religious Belief Just a Cultural Phenomenon?

The arguments questioning whether the Bible's truth is for everyone typically come in one of two forms. First, the prescriptive form of religious pluralism says that all religions are true to those who believe them. Second, the postmodern form says that talk about God isn't expressing truth but rather that it's merely using language based on our own cultural interpretations. In its most extreme form, Postmodernism says that trying to change the beliefs of others does violence to their cultures, which is wrong. Let's take a look at each of these in turn.

> **Religious Pluralism:** the acknowledgment that many different religions exist in today's diverse society.

> **Descriptive Pluralism:** the belief that we should be tolerant of competing religions in order to get along with one another.

### Religious Pluralism

"Isn't religious preference just an artifact of where one grows up?" Someone born in Saudi Arabia, say, is much more likely to be a Muslim than a Christian. So doesn't this mean that everyone who believes does so on account of how he or she was brought up rather than on account of what's true? And if so, doesn't that cast doubt on any religion's claim to being true or at least on our ability to *know* if a religion is true?

**Religious pluralism** is the recognition that different religions exist. Two common forms of religious pluralism are **descriptive pluralism**, which says that the competing claims of various religions cannot all be true, so we must

<!-- page-259 -->

tolerate those with whom we disagree; and **prescriptive pluralism**, which claims that we cannot know any one religion to be exclusively true. One prominent religious pluralist was the philosopher John Hick (1922–2012). Superbly educated, with two doctoral degrees and prestigious teaching positions at Cornell, Cambridge, and Princeton Theological Seminary, Hick became one of the most influential philosophers of religion in our time.

> **Prescriptive Pluralism:** the belief that we should be tolerant of other religions because no single religion can be universally true for everyone.

During his fifteen-year stint at the University of Birmingham in England, Hick met people who were immigrating from all over the world. As he befriended Hindus, Sikhs, and Muslims, he realized that many of them were better people than he judged himself to be. How could these saintly people be ruled out from salvation?

In an effort to help create understanding among religions, Hick helped start a group called All Faiths for One Race (AFFOR). Along the way, he also began questioning the evangelical faith he had embraced as a teenager. Just as the Copernican Revolution overturned the Ptolemaic view that Earth was the center of the solar system, Hick came to believe that we also needed to overturn the idea that Christianity is objectively true for everyone. He wrote,

> The different religious traditions, with their complex internal differentiations, have developed to meet the needs of the range of mentalities expressed in the different human cultures. So long as mankind is gloriously various—which, let us hope, will be always—there will be different traditions of religious faith with their associated forms of worship and lifestyle.<sup>40</sup>

Hick's argument does not, in and of itself, defeat Christianity, but it does seem to undercut the validity of its claim to be true for everyone at all times. How could Christianity be true when most cultures in the world today—indeed, most people in history—never knew about it and never had the opportunity to become Christians?

As an alternative view, Hick developed the idea of the Real. The Real, Hick said, represents ultimate reality and is the source of all world religions. Each religion views the Real differently because of its unique cultural understandings.<sup>41</sup> This difference can even cause various religions to arrive at contradictory conclusions about the Real: "[The Real] cannot be said to be one or many, person or thing, conscious or unconscious, purposive or nonpurposive, substance or process, good or evil, loving or hating," Hick said. "None of these descriptive terms apply literally to the unexperienceable reality that underlies that realm."<sup>42</sup>

> **Real, the:** defined by John Hick to be ultimate reality and the source of all world religions.

As Douglas Groothuis points out, though, if the attributes of the Real are unknowable, how can we know that it explains anything at all, especially the variety of world religions? And if it has no moral properties, how could it reveal to us whether anyone from a given religion is truly saintly?<sup>43</sup>

Alvin Plantinga, an American contemporary of John Hick and a respected philosopher and Christian, insightfully observed that people all over the world seem to have always

<!-- page-260 -->

assumed that their own religion is the true one, and it is only in our own age that people began to widely embrace the idea that all religions are equally valid. If Hick had been born in another culture or time, Plantinga observed, it probably never would have occurred to him to be a religious pluralist. So if our religious beliefs are culturally and historically situated, Hick's belief that no religion has a legitimate claim on ultimate truth is simply a religious viewpoint based on his cultural or historical situation and not actually knowable as true.<sup>44</sup>

At a practical level, though, Hick's argument makes sense to a lot of people. We've all known people who adhered to other religions who seemed genuinely good, and people who adhered to Christianity who seemed genuinely bad. And we've also known people who, while claiming Christianity, mix in so many other religious, cultural, and political assumptions that it's hard to tell what the foundation of their worldview actually is.

Because the particular people we know—Christian or non-Christian—are all over the map in terms of the goodness they manifest, we should probably refrain from judging any given religious system by the particular people who hold to it. Questions such as "Is a particular person living this religion in a holy way?" and "Have there ever been people who lived this religion in a harmful way?" are not as helpful as such questions as "Is this religion livable by everyone?" and "Does this religion describe the contours of the world as it actually exists?"

Hick believed that a genuinely saintly person could be identified by anyone. But this could be so only if some things are true regardless of time and culture and if it is possible for all of us to recognize these things as true (provided our judgment is not clouded by self-deception). In other words, Hick's argument could be true only if "the Real" could truly be known as it actually is. This would require special access to some source of truth that lies outside of God and the Bible. But this is to claim that religious truth can be reliably known, which contradicts the pluralist claim to begin with. It's a bewildering but important point to keep in mind.

The central question, then, goes back to chapters 2 and 3 of this volume. Christians are not arguing that other religions are devoid of truth; rather, they claim that biblical Christianity more accurately describes the contours of the world than other religious systems. Christians source this claim based on what the Bible says about God, human beings, and the world, and how this understanding has worked itself out in culture since the time the Bible was written.

> **Modernism:** a broad term used to describe a range of arts, attitudes, philosophies, and cultural moods that emerged following the eighteenth-century Enlightenment. It is characterized by a strong belief in rationalism, empiricism, science, and technological progress as well as skepticism toward the supernatural, special revelation, and the authority of religion.

### Postmodernism

"Isn't talk about God just ... talk?" Postmodernists don't like to be categorized or defined, but still they have some things in common. One of those points in common is a kind of weariness with **modernism**, especially the use of science and rationalism to seek absolute truth. **Postmodernism** typically says that when we claim to know objective reality, we are just using language to construct our own meaning based on our culture and life experiences.

<!-- page-261 -->

> **Postmodernism:** a skeptical worldview, founded as a reaction to modernism, that is suspicious of metanarratives and teaches that ultimate reality is inaccessible, knowledge is a social construct, and truth claims are political power plays.

Postmodernist professor Jacques Derrida proposed a way to deconstruct any text or statement to uncover how it is culturally bound and therefore not tied to any truth. Derrida's theory of **deconstruction** influenced a group of theologians in 1960s England. Among them was a bishop named John A. T. Robinson, who wrote a book called *Honest to God*. In it, Robinson tried to reform Christianity to be consistent with postmodern assumptions.<sup>45</sup> Those who agreed with Robinson's thinking started a movement known as the **Death of God** theology. According to theologian Graham Ward, they saw "the potential of [Derrida's] deconstruction for furthering their project of announcing the end of theology [the death of God]."<sup>46</sup>

> **Deconstruction:** a method of literary analysis that questions the ability of language to represent reality adequately and seeks to discern and expose the purported underlying ideologies of a text.

> **Death of God Theology:** a theological movement that believes in a god who transcends all being and thus technically does not exist.

According to Derrida's theory of deconstruction, books are just words connected with words, flowing out of subjective experiences and not connected with any actual reality. Another influential Postmodernist, Jean-François Lyotard, said that communication is really just "language-games."<sup>47</sup> That includes the Bible: it's just another book written by mere men who were locked in their own cultures, experiences, and languages. The biblical authors may have thought they were communicating eternal truths about God and humanity, but the Death of God theologians said they were just writing about their own subjective experiences.

Now, if the words of the Bible refer only to other words in a textual setting and do not actually describe external realities such as God, then God is not the Supreme Being who is literally "up there" in heaven somewhere; rather, he comes into existence when we talk about him. Christianity is not about God, sin, and redemption. If it's about anything (which some Postmodernists aren't even sure of), then it's about something such as loving people, but on the whole, God, sin, and redemption are culturally bound concepts that have no ultimate meaning.<sup>48</sup>

Although Derrida's thinking is popular in some academic circles, many notable philosophers have made good arguments to the contrary. German philosopher Edmund Husserl, for example, argues that thoughts are about things, and they are intended to be *about* things. Objects and thoughts have qualities that present themselves consistently to the mind, no matter who is thinking about them. If love has no definable essence, people who try to "love" their neighbors might end up killing them—and there would be no objective way to know whether this kind of "love" was right or wrong, true or twisted.

Whatever your thoughts about Postmodernism in general, it is clear that Scripture views talk about God in a different way than other kinds of talk. It isn't just chatty conversation to

<!-- page-262 -->

pass the time; rather, it's intended to communicate truth that applies to all people at all times in all cultures.

Some, though, see any attempt to bring about change in other cultures as "cultural genocide," implying that it is always negative. This extreme form of Postmodernism implies that trying to bring Jesus into a culture that doesn't know about him would be harmful by definition. Is this the case? Extreme Postmodernists often focus on instances of Christian missionaries who, even though their intentions may have been good, did things that brought harm to the people and cultures they were trying to reach.<sup>49</sup> Scholars have found, however, that most of the blame laid at the feet of Christian missionaries for cultural clashes and oppressive behavior lies with colonial or trading activity, not with missions.<sup>50</sup> In the Age of Enlightenment, European colonists and traders, convinced of their superiority in securing human progress, thought it was their special duty to "help" the "natives" become as good as they believed themselves to be.

> **Cultural Imperialism:** the belief that one's culture or race is superior to others.

When Charles Darwin came along, his ideas about the survival of the fittest were like peanut butter to the Enlightenment's jelly. The Enlightenment's "sweetness" was now "sticky" because it was thought to be scientifically accurate to say that the European races were more highly evolved than other races. Such a view is unbelievable to us today, but Darwin believed it, and many others did as well.

It is no secret that one of Darwin's intentions was to show that Europeans were, in fact, superior. After all, the subtitle of his most famous book, *Origin of Species*, is *The Preservation of Favored Races in the Struggle for Life*. Scholars such as Stewart Gill now believe that such Darwinian thinking is largely responsible for the oppressive policies of aboriginal people in Australia, for example.<sup>51</sup> To the extent that missionary societies were involved, it was because they were co-opted by traders and governments to carry out policies of cultural supremacy. Even into the twentieth century, atheists such as Bertrand Russell thought it was a duty to "civilize" native peoples, and, importantly, he saw Christianity as an obstacle in doing this.<sup>52</sup> In fact, the use of the word *civilize*, from an Enlightenment view, means making progress stripped of religious faith.<sup>53</sup> There may have been racist missionaries, but racism in the form of **cultural imperialism** is more properly laid at the feet of Enlightenment rationalism than of Christian missions.

In our fallen world, it should not surprise us to find that some Christian missionaries acted abusively toward those they set out to reach. But we should not let this obscure the fact that Christian missionaries have done a great deal of good in bringing freedom, health, and peace to cultures around the world. In fact, it is now widely known that Christian missionaries were the only ones to consistently work to stop the systematic enslavement of native populations, even to the point of, as in the case of medical missionary David Livingston, trying to find alternative, legitimate business activity for slave traders so they would stop their hideous work.<sup>54</sup> Moreover, contrary to accounts of missionaries forcing natives to act like Europeans, it was missionaries who helped preserve native music, culture, and language.<sup>55</sup>

Why then all this nasty opposition to missionaries? One historical reason is that missionaries stood against the sexual and economic exploitation of natives to which the "civilized" European colonists and traders thought they were entitled.<sup>56</sup> For all his faults, even Charles

<!-- page-263 -->

Darwin blamed opposition to missionary efforts on the licentiousness of those who wished to exploit native women.<sup>57</sup>

## 8. What Should Christians Do?

Wow. We've covered a lot of ground in this chapter, from philosophical arguments for God's existence to how morality proceeds from God's nature and character to responses to arguments about how the religions of different cultures disprove biblical revelation about God. The question now is what to *do* with all this information.

True north is true for everyone, regardless of culture. God's revelation represents true north in a spiritual and cultural sense. C. S. Lewis showed that despite their differences, cultures all over the world largely seem to operate by the same moral laws, with similar understandings of the need to do good to others, duties to family and leaders, justice, duties to future generations, good faith, truth telling, and mercy.<sup>58</sup> What explains this? Because God created all humans in his own image, Christianity says, an ethical system based on his character will be resident in every soul, across all cultures, at all times. Calvin D. Linton, onetime professor at George Washington University, found that, in fact, such a basic pattern of ethical codes exists:

> Because God created all humans in his own image, Christianity says, an ethical system based on his character will be resident in every soul, across all cultures, at all times.

> There is a basic pattern of similarity among [ethical codes]. Such things as murder, lying, adultery, cowardice are, for example, almost always condemned. The universality of the ethical sense itself (the "oughtness" of conduct), and the similarities within the codes of diverse cultures indicate a common moral heritage for all mankind which materialism or naturalism cannot explain.<sup>59</sup>

If Christianity alone can explain objective morality, are we not obligated to try to spread it? Do we have any right to withhold good from those who haven't heard? Of course, we ought to act in a culturally sensitive way, but the good news about Jesus is what the world truly needs and desperately seeks. Here are two practical implications as we draw this chapter to a close.

### Truth Is True in Practical Ways, Not Just in the Spiritual Realm

As authors Darrow Miller, Bob Moffitt, and Scott D. Allen say, "All nations, to some degree, hold to destructive, false beliefs, even nations where the church is active and prosperous."<sup>60</sup> When God's principles are brought to bear, humans flourish, even when those promoting God's principles lack a full understanding of their implications.

For example, Japanese immigrants to the Dominican Republic are doing far better and are far more prosperous than native farmers, after just a few decades. Their belief that hard work and perseverance lead to success was superior to the fatalistic belief system of the local farmers who believed that they would always be poor and that they could never succeed because of the hardships they faced.<sup>61</sup>

<!-- page-264 -->

Health care in America, where people are more likely to hold to a belief that human life is valuable, is better than in India, where it is believed that humans are dispensable.<sup>62</sup> The teachings of the Bible have ended cycles of revenge and blood feuding in the remote jungles of Papua New Guinea.<sup>63</sup> Air and water pollution is far worse in China, cutting the life span in some parts of the country by more than five years, than in nations that have embraced a biblical value of caring for the environment.<sup>64</sup>

As an American, I must also be willing to look at my own nation through a biblical lens. In my country, abortion policies have led to the murder of tens of millions of tiny persons, all in the pursuit of sexual activity without consequences.<sup>65</sup> If humans are truly made in God's image, and if, as Dr. Seuss's Horton so wisely said, "A person's a person no matter how small," then this is nothing short of a holocaust. Part of spreading the good news is working to establish the dignity and value of all people, no matter how small.

### Discipleship Is a Command, Not a Suggestion

People are incalculably devious in finding ways to suppress the truth (Rom. 1). If we knew of a coming tsunami, though, how could we justify failing to warn people to leave the beach? Similarly, if we know spiritual truth and fail to share it with people caught in the grip of false religions and philosophies, wouldn't that be wrong?

> If we knew of a coming tsunami, how could we justify failing to warn people to leave the beach? Similarly, if we know spiritual truth and fail to share it with people caught in the grip of false religions and philosophies, wouldn't that be wrong?

In Matthew 28:18–20, Jesus told his disciples, "All authority in heaven and on earth has been given to me. Go therefore and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, teaching them to observe all that I have commanded you." In Luke 24:47, Jesus said, "Repentance and forgiveness of sins should be proclaimed in his name to all nations." In Acts 1:8, he told believers, "You will receive power when the Holy Spirit has come upon you, and you will be my witnesses in Jerusalem and in all Judea and Samaria, and to the end of the earth."

Jesus is good news for everyone, everywhere.

Scripture says Satan has deceived the nations into believing what is untrue (Rev. 20:1–3),<sup>66</sup> but the gospel promises that God, in Christ, has made a way of freedom. John 8:36 says, "If the Son sets you free, you will be free indeed." The good news is good news for everyone, even the most vulnerable. Jesus said, "Let the little children come to me and do not hinder them, for to such belongs the kingdom of heaven" (Matt. 19:14). The disabled are also welcome (Luke 5:18–20)<sup>67</sup> as are outcasts (Luke 5:12–14).<sup>68</sup>

According to English Christian leader John Stott, God is a God of mission. God is fulfilling the promise given to Abraham that through his revelation, all nations of the earth would be blessed. Stott says this understanding

> condemns all our petty parochialism and narrow nationalism, our racial pride (whether white or black), our condescending paternalism and arrogant imperialism. How dare we adopt a hostile or scornful or even indifferent attitude to any person of

<!-- page-265 -->

> another color or culture if our God is the God of "all the families of the earth?" We need to become global Christians with a global vision, for we have a global God.<sup>69</sup>

So is God Christian? Not in the sense that humans are (or can be) by becoming saved and forgiven followers of Jesus Christ. But is the God of Christianity the real God of all reality? As we have seen, there are very good reasons to believe he exists as the Bible reveals him. His truth—made known through Jesus Christ, the Word of God made flesh—changes people and sets them free in every way a person can be set free. This is good news for all of eternity, and it is good news every day, everywhere, throughout all the earth.

## Endnotes

1. Desmond Tutu, *God Is Not a Christian: And Other Provocations* (New York: HarperOne, 2011), 6.
2. Bruce Demarest, "General Revelation," in *Evangelical Dictionary of Theology*, ed. Walter A. Elwell (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2001), 1019–21.
3. William Lane Craig, *On Guard: Defending Your Faith with Reason and Precision* (Colorado Springs, CO: David C Cook, 2010), 53.
4. Craig, *On Guard*, 55.
5. For a thorough explanation of this complicated argument, see Lois Frankel, "From a Metaphysical Point of View: Leibniz and the Principle of Sufficient Reason," *The Southern Journal of Philosophy* 24, no. 3 (1986): 321–33; and other essays reprinted in *Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz: Critical Assessments*, ed. Roger S. Woolhouse (New York: Routledge, 1994).
6. Craig, *On Guard*, 56–57.
7. Norman L. Geisler, *Baker Encyclopedia of Christian Apologetics* (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker, 1999), 399. *Kalam* is the Arabic word for "discourse."
8. Aristotle developed a version of the cosmological argument, as mentioned above, but his version doesn't depend on when things are first caused. It says instead that there has to be an uncaused cause operating at all times. Interestingly, Einstein's equations pointed to a universe that was not static. However, because this contradicted the scientific consensus of his day, Einstein added the "cosmological constant" to his theory to make it fit the prevailing assumption. Many years later, Edwin Hubble showed that the universe was not static. Einstein realized his error: instead of trusting his numbers, he had altered his theory. He later called his cosmological constant the biggest mistake of his career.
9. Frank Turek makes this statement in his lecture at the Summit Student Conferences. He discusses this issue of the big bang in chap. 3 of a book he coauthored with Norman Geisler, *I Don't Have Enough Faith to Be an Atheist* (Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2004).
10. Antony Flew and Roy Abraham Varghese, *There Is a God: How the World's Most Notorious Atheist Changed His Mind* (San Francisco: HarperOne, 2007), 136.
11. In a January 2012 issue of *New Scientist*, Lisa Grossman reports that every model of the universe assumes a beginning. "Why Physicists Can't Avoid a Creation Event," www.newscientist.com/article/mg21328474.400-why-physicists-cant-avoid-a-creation-event.html. In a December 2012 issue of the same publication, Marcus Chown reviews research from cosmologists Alex Vilenkin and Audrey Mithani, offering three reasons the universe cannot have existed forever. "Before the Big Bang: Something or Nothing," www.newscientist.com/article/mg21628932.000-before-the-big-bang-something-or-nothing.html.
12. William Lane Craig, "Must the Beginning of the Universe Have a Personal Cause? A Rejoinder," Reasonable Faith, www.reasonablefaith.org/must-the-beginning-of-the-universe-have-a-personal-cause-a-rejoinder.
13. J. P. Moreland, "Does the Cosmological Argument Show There Is a God?" in Ted Cabal et al., eds., *The Apologetics Study Bible* (Nashville: B&H, 2007), 806.
14. Sean McDowell and Jonathan Morrow, *Is God Just a Human Invention? And Seventeen Other Questions Raised by the New Atheists* (Grand Rapids, MI: Kregel, 2010), 78–79.
15. This is obviously a simplification of Hawking's argument. If you'd like to go into detail, see Stephen Hawking and Leonard Mlodinow, *The Grand Design* (New York: Bantam, 2010), especially chap. 6, 121–46, "Choosing Our Universe."
16. See Thomas Aquinas, *Summa Theologica*, trans. Fathers of the English Dominican Province (Benziger Bros. ed., 1947), Treatise on the Creation. Access online at www.ccel.org/ccel/aquinas/summa.
17. William A. Dembski, "Intelligent Design: A Brief Introduction," in *Evidence for God: 50 Arguments for Faith from the Bible, History, Philosophy, and Science*, ed. William A. Dembski and Michael R. Licona (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker, 2010), 104.
18. William A. Dembski, *The Design Revolution: Answering the Toughest Questions about Intelligent Design* (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity, 2004), 82–83.
19. William Lane Craig, *Reasonable Faith: Christian Truth and Apologetics*, 3rd ed. (Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2008), 158.
20. Lee Strobel, *The Case for a Creator: A Journalist Investigates Scientific Evidence That Points toward God* (Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2004), 132.
21. Strobel, *Case for a Creator*, 132–33.
22. Paul Davies, *The Mind of God: The Scientific Basis for a Rational World* (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1992), 16.
23. Guillermo Gonzalez and Jay W. Richards, *The Privileged Planet: How Our Place in the Cosmos Is Designed for Discovery* (Washington, DC: Regnery, 2004), 95.
24. Francis S. Collins, *The Language of God: A Scientist Presents Evidence for Belief* (New York: Free Press, 2006), 102.
25. Douglas Groothuis, *Christian Apologetics: A Comprehensive Case for Biblical Faith* (Downers Grove, IL: IVP Academic, 2011), 332–33.
26. William Lane Craig, "The Teleological Argument and the Anthropic Principle," www.reasonablefaith.org/the-teleological-argument-and-the-anthropic-principle.
27. Quoted in Tim Folger, "Science's Alternative to an Intelligent Creator: The Multiverse Theory," *Discover*, December 2008, http://discovermagazine.com/2008/dec/10-sciences-alternative-to-an-intelligent-creator.
28. Richard Dawkins, *The Blind Watchmaker: Why the Evidence of Evolution Reveals a Universe without Design* (New York: Norton, 1996).
29. Stephen C. Meyer, *Signature in the Cell: DNA and the Evidence for Intelligent Design* (New York: HarperOne, 2009), 278.
30. Dawkins, *Blind Watchmaker*, 47–48.
31. For a thorough discussion, see Michael J. Behe, *Darwin's Black Box: The Biochemical Challenge to Evolution*, 10th anniversary ed. (New York: Free Press, 2006).
32. Glen Cook, *Dreams of Steel* (New York: Tor, 1990).
33. McDowell and Morrow, *Is God Just a Human Invention?*, 150.
34. William Lane Craig, "The Indispensability of Theological Meta-ethical Foundations for Morality," www.reasonablefaith.org/the-indispensability-of-theological-meta-ethical-foundations-for-morality.
35. George Barna, "Americans Are Most Likely to Base Truth on Feelings," Barna Group, February 12, 2002, www.barna.org/barna-update/article/5-barna-update/67-americans-are-most-likely-to-base-truth-on-feelings.
36. Groothuis, *Christian Apologetics*, 350–51.
37. Francis J. Beckwith and Gregory Koukl, *Relativism: Feet Firmly Planted in Mid-Air* (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker, 1998), 59.
38. Paul Copan, "God, Naturalism, and the Foundations of Morality," in *The Future of Atheism: Alister McGrath and Daniel Dennett in Dialogue*, ed. Robert B. Stewart (Minneapolis: Fortress, 2008), 142.
39. Craig, *On Guard*, 137.
40. John Hick, *An Interpretation of Religion: Human Responses to the Transcendent*, 2nd ed. (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2004), 376.
41. Hick, *Interpretation of Religion*, 233–51.
42. Hick, *Interpretation of Religion*, 246.
43. Groothuis, *Christian Apologetics*, 578.
44. Alvin Plantinga, *Warranted Christian Belief* (New York: Oxford University Press, 2000), 438–57.
45. John A. T. Robinson, *Honest to God* (Philadelphia: Westminster, 1963).
46. Graham Ward, ed., *The Blackwell Companion to Postmodern Theology* (Malden, MA: Blackwell, 2001), xv.
47. Jean-François Lyotard, *The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge*, trans. Geoff Bennington and Brian Massumi (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1984).
48. For a good overview of the Death of God theology, see John D. Caputo and Gianni Vattimo, *After the Death of God*, ed. Jeffrey W. Robbins (New York: Columbia University Press, 2007).
49. For a discussion, see Robert D. Woodberry, "The Missionary Roots of Liberal Democracy," *American Political Science Review* 106, no. 2 (May 2012): 244–74.
50. Woodberry, "Missionary Roots," 244–74.
51. Stewart Gill, "Missionary Effort and Aboriginal Peoples," in *Whitewash: On Keith Windschuttle's Fabrication of Aboriginal History*, ed. Robert Manne (Melbourne: Black Inc., 2003), 264–83.
52. Bertrand Russell, "Why I Am Not a Christian," lecture delivered March 6, 1927, at Battersea Town Hall, London.
53. See Vishal Mangalwadi, *The Book That Made Your World: How the Bible Created the Soul of Western Civilization* (Nashville: Thomas Nelson, 2011), chap. 4.
54. See Andrew F. Walls, *The Missionary Movement in Christian History: Studies in the Transmission of Faith* (Maryknoll, NY: Orbis, 1996).
55. See Lamin Sanneh, *Translating the Message: The Missionary Impact on Culture*, 2nd ed. (Maryknoll, NY: Orbis, 2009).
56. Woodberry, "Missionary Roots," 244–74.
57. Charles Darwin, *The Descent of Man and Selection in Relation to Sex* (New York: Appleton, 1871), 2:393–94.
58. C. S. Lewis, *The Abolition of Man* (1943; repr., New York: HarperOne, 2001), appendix.
59. Calvin D. Linton, "Ethical Systems, Christian Ethics," in *Baker's Dictionary of Christian Ethics*, ed. Carl F. H. Henry (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker, 1973), 220.
60. Darrow Miller, Bob Moffitt, and Scott D. Allen, *The Worldview of the Kingdom of God* (Seattle: YWAM, 2005), 12.
61. Miller, Moffitt, and Allen, *Worldview of the Kingdom of God*, 15.
62. Miller, Moffitt, and Allen, *Worldview of the Kingdom of God*, 13.
63. Miller, Moffitt, and Allen, *Worldview of the Kingdom of God*, 14.
64. Miller, Moffitt, and Allen, *Worldview of the Kingdom of God*, 14.
65. See Randy Alcorn, *Why Pro-Life? Caring for the Unborn and Their Mothers* (Peabody, MA: Hendrickson, 2012).
66. See also 2 Cor. 4:4.
67. The story of the paralytic lowered through the roof.
68. The story of the healing of the leper.
69. John R. W. Stott, *The Message of Romans: God's Good News for the World* (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity, 1994), 53.
