<!-- page-269 -->
# Chapter 11: Supernatural Good and Evil

## 1. Otherworldly Beliefs

"I very much believe in ghosts. There is no question in my mind that they exist," said my classmate emphatically. I was shocked. This wasn't grade school. We were both enrolled in a PhD program, and my classmate had made it clear that as a skeptic and liberal political activist, she had no use for spiritual things, at least those of the Christian variety.

It seemed odd, though: How could my classmate believe in supernatural beings but express skepticism about God or miracles? Even though she was very smart, my classmate did not

<!-- page-270 -->

have a coherent belief system. She was not alone. Many modern people struggle with biblical accounts of the supernatural: angelic appearances, unexplainable and timely divine interventions in the physical world, demon possession, and, most incredible of all, the resurrection of the dead. They wonder, Haven't accounts such as the Red Sea parting and Lazarus returning to life been disproved by science?

> **Age of Enlightenment:** an eighteenth-century intellectual movement that emphasized reason, science, and individualism over tradition and religious authority.

Since the **Age of Enlightenment**, some have tried to present a Christianity minus the supernatural. With good intention and respect for Jesus of Nazareth, they wanted to champion the moral teaching of Christianity to those who were skeptical of the supernatural. For example, Thomas Jefferson wrote a "Bible," titled *The Life and Morals of Jesus of Nazareth*, consisting of the Gospels with all references to miracles and Jesus's deity removed. In a letter to John Adams, Jefferson trumpeted his achievement as "forty-six pages, of pure and unsophisticated doctrines," saying, "In extracting the pure principles which he taught, we should have to strip off the artificial vestments in which they have been muffled."<sup>1</sup>

If what we have seen so far in this volume has any merit, though, Christianity without the supernatural is like a symphony with no instruments or like snow skiing without snow: the supernatural is a central ingredient that brings out the flavor of everything else. The apostle Paul, for example, stakes the validity of the Christian faith on whether Christ bodily rose from the dead (1 Cor. 15). Without this miraculous event, we are still in our sins, he said.

Further, the Bible describes miraculous events not just to impress people with God's power but also to display how God uses his power to restore all things to himself. As pastor Tim Keller puts it,

> We modern people think of miracles as the suspension of the natural order, but Jesus meant them to be the restoration of the natural order. The Bible tells us that God did not originally make the world to have disease, hunger, and death in it. Jesus has come to redeem where it is wrong and heal the world where it is broken. His miracles are not just proofs that he has power but also wonderful foretastes of what he is going to do with that power. Jesus' miracles are not just a challenge to our minds, but a promise to our hearts, that the world we all want is coming.<sup>2</sup>

Jesus's healing of sick people showed his desire to restore things to rights. His turning of barrels of water into wine showed an attitude of abundance; Jesus lavished the wedding feast with barrel after barrel of the finest wine, showing up the Greek god of wine and son of Zeus, Dionysius (John 2:1–11). And Jesus's walking on the water showed that he, not Baal, was the master of nature (Matt. 14:22–33).

The Bible does not seem interested in offering just a moral philosophy; it tells of a God who displayed his power in creation and continues to show it today. In this chapter, we'll journey into the heart of the Bible's supernatural claims, focusing on how God relates to the world. We'll then tackle the main arguments used to deny the supernatural, explore the question of miracles (most notably, the resurrection of Christ), and delve briefly into the reality

<!-- page-271 -->

of supernatural evil (Satan, demons, and demon possession). Our goal is twofold: first, to explore evidence of the Bible's truth, and second and most important, to restore our amazement at how the Bible demonstrates Christ's transformative power to this very day.

## 2. The Materialist/Naturalist Challenge to the Supernatural

Christianity is quite different from other faiths in that it relies heavily on miracles to provide proof of faith in ways other religions, such as Islam, do not. The story of Islam begins with Muhammad receiving divine visions and communicating with the angel Gabriel, and the Quran affirms that prophets of old performed many miracles.<sup>3</sup> The Quran acknowledges Jesus's miracles too,<sup>4</sup> but Muhammad was a prophet, not a miracle worker.<sup>5</sup> Professor of philosophy Oliver Leaman observes, "Islam as a religion does not make much use of miracles."<sup>6</sup> Muhammad claimed to be greater than Jesus, but as the Christian philosopher Blaise Pascal puts it, "Any man can do what Muhammad has done; for he performed no miracles.... No man can do what Christ has done."<sup>7</sup>

In the Greek language, the word for "miracle," *simaios*, means "sign." As author and speaker Eric Metaxas phrases it, "Miracles are signs, and like all signs, they are never about themselves; they're about whatever they are pointing toward. Miracles point to something *beyond* themselves. But to what? To God himself."<sup>8</sup>

> **Miracle:** a supernatural sign or event that is intended to highlight the power and goodness of God.

Author Stephen Davis points out that Scripture shows God's relating to the world in four primary ways: (1) bringing the world into existence, (2) sustaining its existence, (3) acting through natural causes in the world, and (4) acting miraculously or outside of natural causes in the world.<sup>9</sup> In other words, God is more than the fuse lighter of the big bang; he shapes, sustains, and cares for the world he made.

With today's mind-set of scientific investigation, many claim that faith simply cannot be proved. "Faith is believing what you know ain't so," Mark Twain famously said.<sup>10</sup> Many today follow Twain's dictum in conceiving of religion as that which relies on unsubstantiated belief or even ignorance, and science as the systematic, impartial application of reason. Science, according to this narrative, rescues the world from superstition and backward thinking.

To atheists, disproving miracles is an important strategy in getting people to give up their God beliefs. But atheists have their beliefs too. In fact, underlying arguments against the supernatural in this common way of thinking are two interrelated assumptions:

(1) **Materialism**, which focuses on *being*, says that everything that exists is purely material and that nothing that is immaterial (such as God) exists, and

> **Materialism:** the belief that reality is composed solely of matter.

(2) **Naturalism**, which focuses on *knowing*, says that everything that exists is composed of natural entities that

<!-- page-272 -->

can be explained and justified through scientific investigation. Anything said to exist outside of nature (such as God) is thought by naturalists to either not exist or to be unknowable.<sup>11</sup>

Those who embrace materialist/naturalist assumptions find it impossible to believe in any supernatural world. In fact, they define reality in such a way as to exclude the supernatural by definition. Harvard paleontologist Richard Lewontin admits, "Materialism is absolute, for we cannot allow a Divine Foot in the door."<sup>12</sup> Everything is material, the famed Edward O. Wilson asserted, "including the mind and all its spiritual products."<sup>13</sup> It is important to remember that materialists/naturalists do not prove that the supernatural does not exist; they *assume* it does not exist and build their worldview on that assumption. And if nothing supernatural exists, then the Christian conception of God vaporizes as well, like the clearing away of a thick fog, revealing what is real, to the minds of materialists/naturalists.

Believing that all life evolved from nonlife, that only the material world exists, and that everything has a natural cause can lead people to look down on those who believe in the supernatural as people who just don't "get it" and ought not be taken seriously. For example, Richard Dawkins offered a crowd at an atheist rally the following advice: "Mock them, ridicule them, in public ... with contempt."<sup>14</sup>

To support their convictions, materialists/naturalists often turn to the arguments of philosopher David Hume (1711–1776), who objects to the existence of miracles both "in principle" and "in fact." His primary "in principle" objection concerns humanity's alleged uniform experience against miracles. Nature, he suggests, develops in a uniform fashion. Such a world leaves no room for miracles, and so therefore they most likely have not occurred.<sup>15</sup>

Hume then made four "in fact" arguments against miracles:

> First, no historical miracle has been sufficiently attested by honest and reliable men who are of such social standing that they would have a great deal to lose by lying. Second, people crave miraculous stories and will gullibly believe absurd stories, which is evidenced by the sheer number of false tales of miraculous events. Third, miracles only occur among barbarous people. And fourth, miracles occur in all religions and thus cancel each other out, since they espouse contradictory doctrines.<sup>16</sup>

Materialists/naturalists consider these arguments to be a tour de force of intellectual reasoning and therefore irrefutable evidence of Christianity's deep flaws. Is there a response?

## 3. Responding to the Materialist/Naturalist Challenge

In this short space, we'll focus on five responses to the materialist/naturalist challenge.

### Hume's Arguments against Miracles Are Flawed

Our first response to the materialist/naturalist challenge is that Hume's reasonable-sounding arguments are not, in fact, reasonable. Let's take each argument in turn. First, in reference to Hume's "in principle" argument that miracles are impossible in a uniform world, C. S. Lewis points out that this is something we cannot know:

<!-- page-273 -->

> Now of course we must agree with Hume that if there is absolutely "uniform experience" against miracles, if in other words they have never happened, why then they never have. Unfortunately we know the experience against them to be uniform only if we know that all the reports of them are false. And we can know all the reports to be false only if we know already that miracles have never occurred. In fact, we are arguing in a circle.<sup>17</sup>

In effect, Hume is saying, "Miracles have not occurred because such things are not possible." Hume's conclusion is just his premise restated. That's what Lewis means by arguing in a circle. By definition, though, a miracle is something that breaks out of our ordinary experience. Otherwise we would never know that it was a miracle in the first place.

But let's move on to Hume's four "in fact" arguments and see if they are persuasive in making his case.

First, Hume said that "no historical miracle has been sufficiently attested by honest and reliable men who are of such social standing that they would have a great deal to lose by lying." But as Sean McDowell and Jonathan Morrow note, the gospel writers were, in fact, capable of writing accurate historical accounts and were willing to stake their lives on what they wrote. At the very least, this demonstrates the depth of their sincerity. "Liars make poor martyrs," they say.<sup>18</sup>

Second, Hume said, "People crave miraculous stories and will gullibly believe absurd things. Yes, some people are gullible and believe improbable things, but it does not follow from this that no improbable things have ever occurred.

Third, Hume said that "miracles only occur among barbarous people." This, however, is not true in the case of Jesus. "Jesus's miracles did not occur among a barbarous people, but among the Jews who were a highly educated and sophisticated people," say McDowell and Morrow.<sup>19</sup>

Fourth, Hume said, "Miracles occur in all religions and thus cancel each other out, since they espouse contradictory doctrines." But the miracles in the Bible and throughout Christian history seem to be of a different character from those reports from other traditions. Poor, nonhistorical examples of miracles from other religions do not rule out the well-attested miracles common to Christian experience, most notably, as we will see, the resurrection of Christ.

> Poor, nonhistorical examples of miracles from other religions do not rule out the well-attested miracles common to Christian experience, most notably, as we will see, the resurrection of Christ.

This section is not, obviously, intended to completely refute David Hume's arguments about miracles. But as more and more evidence is collected, it becomes clear that human experience on this planet is far from uniform, as Hume asserted. Several years ago, New Testament scholar Craig Keener, skeptical of accounts of miraculous occurrences, developed a detailed methodology for examining thousands of reported miracles. What he found was stunning. Apparently, supernatural events, including miracles, are much more common than people assume. Keener's two-volume work titled *Miracles* describes his findings in more than twelve hundred pages of painstaking documentation.<sup>20</sup>

<!-- page-274 -->

In the end, what Hume thought he knew in theory has turned out to be wrong both in theory and in practical reality. There is, at the very least, good reason to believe that Hume's arguments do not account for reality.

Probably no one has put it better than the inimitable G. K. Chesterton, who took disbelievers in miracles to task in a lively, and lengthy, passage in his book *Orthodoxy*:

> Somehow or other an extraordinary idea has arisen that the disbelievers in miracles consider them coldly and fairly calm, while believers in miracles accept them only in connection with some dogma. The fact is quite the other way. The believers in miracles accept them (rightly or wrongly) because they have evidence for them. The disbelievers in miracles deny them (rightly or wrongly) because they have a doctrine against them.... It is we Christians who accept all actual evidence—it is you rationalists who refuse actual evidence being constrained to do so by your creed. But I am not constrained by any creed in the matter, and looking impartially into certain miracles of medieval and modern times, I have come to the conclusion that they occurred. All argument against these plain facts is always argument in a circle. If I say, "Medieval documents attest certain miracles as much as they attest certain battles," they answer, "But medievals were superstitious"; if I want to know in what they were superstitious, the only ultimate answer is that they believed in the miracles.... Iceland is impossible because only stupid sailors have seen it; and the sailors are only stupid because they say they have seen Iceland.<sup>21</sup>

Saying that people in the past were gullible and easily fooled into believing insufficient evidence for miracles may be an indictment against being gullible and easily fooled, but it is insufficient evidence against believing in miracles themselves.

### Materialism/Naturalism Presumes Too Much of Science

> **Scientific Method:** a process of empirical inquiry that seeks to understand the phenomena of the physical world through hypothesizing, observing, measuring, experimenting, predicting, and testing.

Our second response to materialism/naturalism is that the **scientific method** is not actually as powerful as materialists/naturalists assume it to be. The scientific method makes sense of only a material world, where the things observed can be explained by natural processes. To say that anything outside of what science can study does not exist is like saying that a lake is only twenty feet deep because that's how long our measuring tape is. In fact, if only what can be measured using the scientific method exists, then wouldn't we have to say that the scientific method itself doesn't exist, as it cannot itself be measured, observed, or repeated?

Explaining all of reality is a burden far too heavy for science to carry. Even Julian Huxley, one of the twentieth century's leading evolutionists, recognized the limited nature of the sci-

<!-- page-275 -->

> Science has removed the obscuring veil of mystery from many phenomena, much to the benefit of the human race: but it confronts us with a basic and universal mystery—the mystery of existence in general, and of the existence of mind in particular. Why does the world exist? Why is the world-stuff what it is? Why does it have mental or subjective aspects as well as material or objective ones? We do not know.<sup>22</sup>

Very few scholars today would agree that we can know only that which can be studied with the scientific method. Historical facts, logical arguments, sociological observations, and aesthetic judgments are also accepted as evidence. And, as we will see, evidence of all of these sorts has been shown to lend credibility to many key Christian beliefs.

### Materialism/Naturalism Explains Too Little about Reality

Our third response to materialism/naturalism is that even if we assume that science could do all that materialists/naturalists say it can, it has very little to say about what makes life worth living or societies worth living in. It cannot explain why humans want to be free or why society should preserve liberty. It cannot explain why we find life valuable or why the law should protect it. It cannot explain human happiness or why "the pursuit of happiness" should be considered an inalienable right, as the American Declaration of Independence says.

Still, people often just assume that materialism and naturalism are true. They live with what philosopher Charles Taylor refers to as an "immanent frame": if I can't see it, hear it, or feel it, it doesn't exist. In his massive and acclaimed text *A Secular Age*, Taylor points out that this modern bias toward materialism/naturalism is an unquestioned assumption, not a justified conclusion.<sup>23</sup> Materialism/naturalism prizes the kind of knowledge that we can individually possess, but as Taylor points out, if we begin our inquires with "I" rather than "we" or "God," we will arrive at very different, and not necessarily better, conclusions.

Clearly, science has dramatically increased human knowledge, and it offers a useful and powerful means for knowing a good many things, but it is not effective in explaining *all* of reality. Science simply does not replace religion as many materialists/naturalists suppose. Someone who says, "Science replaces religion," isn't making a statement of fact but rather is revealing how narrow his or her framework is for understanding reality. According to professor of political science Hunter Baker, "What happened in the matter of science and religion was the creation of a legend."<sup>24</sup>

> **Monism:** the belief that reality is ultimately composed of one essential substance.

> **Pantheism:** the belief that everything in the universe is ultimately divine.

### Dualism Explains the World Better

Our fourth response to materialism/naturalism is to call into question the very idea that believing that reality is only material and that it can be explained through natural processes alone is valid. **Monism** (*mono* is Greek for "one") is the belief that ultimately reality consists of one thing. For some this may be the world of "spirit," as in **pantheism**. For others it may signify that only

<!-- page-276 -->

the material world exists. **Dualism** (*duo* is Greek for "two") holds that reality is ultimately composed of two essential substances. **Mind/body dualism** says that human beings are composed of immaterial minds and material bodies.<sup>25</sup>

> **Dualism:** the belief that reality is ultimately composed of two essential substances.

> **Mind/Body Dualism:** the belief that human beings are composed of immaterial minds and material bodies.

According to this species of dualism, a soul or other immaterial entity is just as real as the physical body to which it is united. What happens in the mind has physical consequences and vice versa.

For most of the twentieth century, materialists/naturalists believed their viewpoint to be the only correct one, but this is changing. Contrary to materialists/naturalists' triumphant proclamations, the world is becoming more religious, not less.<sup>26</sup> And although materialists/naturalists may count among their ranks those who have jumped ship from **theism** to **atheism**, there have been many prominent conversions the other way, including one of the world's most notorious atheists, Antony Flew, who recanted his atheism in *There Is a God: How the World's Most Notorious Atheist Changed His Mind*. And in his book *Mind and Cosmos*, renowned atheist philosopher Thomas Nagel stunned the academic world by announcing his newfound skepticism of materialism: "It is prima facie highly implausible that life as we know it is the result of a sequence of physical accidents together with the mechanism of natural selection."<sup>27</sup> Too, we can hardly dismiss the anthology of essays from leading experts called *Rethinking Secularism*.<sup>28</sup> In it, several authors question the validity of the assumption that God is irrelevant to what's important in life, which is one thing nearly all materialists/naturalists believe.

> **Theism:** the belief in the existence of a God or gods.

> **Atheism:** the belief that God does not exist.

### Verifiable Experiences Demonstrate the Insufficiency of Materialism/Naturalism

Our fifth response to the materialist/naturalist challenge is that many things seemingly occur in the world for which materialist/naturalist arguments simply do not account for the data that has, and is continuing to be, collected by reasonable observers. The evidence for Near-Death Experiences (NDEs) is a surprising area of research challenging the belief that only the natural world exists. Recently, Eben Alexander, a respected neurosurgeon, wrote of having personally experienced a disease through which, according to hospital records, he suffered brain death but then revived. His experiences during that time caused Alexander to reexamine the evidence for NDEs, after which he concluded that materialist/naturalist explanations are simply insufficient.<sup>29</sup> Philosopher Gary Habermas has also rigorously studied such experiences and concluded that when it comes to explaining such things as NDEs, naturalism is the odd man out.<sup>30</sup>

NDE stories are often sensational accounts that result in significant life changes for people who experience them.<sup>31</sup> Profound life changes ought to get our attention, but often their sensational nature causes skeptics to immediately dismiss them. NDE researchers have

<!-- page-277 -->

learned not to be so quick to scoff. Rather, separating out the "traveling through a tunnel and seeing a bright light" kind of stories and focusing instead on the well-documented cases in which people who experienced brain death reported going places and seeing things they simply could not have known in their "death" state—such as what meal was being cooked at their home or what objects were on the roof of the hospital.<sup>32</sup>

NDE claims have their doubters, as you might expect.<sup>33</sup> One person actually created a "God helmet" to simulate experiences people say they have when encountering God.<sup>34</sup> Just because it is possible to stimulate the brain to perceive God experiences, however, does not mean such experiences never have a supernatural origin. Scientists can stimulate the brain to experience sexual desire, but this does not mean there is no such thing as genuine love. Doubtless, the brain is a part of our experiences, but this does not sufficiently demonstrate that our experiences are only brain activity.

In this section, we've introduced responses to materialist/naturalist assumptions. But belief in the supernatural does not prevail just because the arguments for materialism/naturalism are inadequate. And Christianity in particular needs to show that we ought not just believe in the "generically" supernatural but in Jesus Christ as the God-man whose very life showed that God is active in the world and whose conquering of death and evil releases humanity from the fear of both. In this, it would be helpful to have evidence that can be explored with the tools of inquiry accepted among scholars. As it turns out, just such evidence is available for one of the most extraordinary events in all of history: the resurrection of Jesus.

## 4. Positive Evidence for the Supernatural: The Resurrection of the Son of God

As we have already seen, the biblical account is remarkably well supported for having been recorded so long ago. When it comes to the life of Christ, leading scholars, such as early twentieth-century archaeologist William F. Albright, were convinced that the New Testament books were written soon after the events they described and by people matching the characteristics of those said to have written them.<sup>35</sup> Further, the books of the Bible survived through time remarkably uncorrupted. Gleason L. Archer Jr., for example, reported that even though copies of Isaiah discovered in Qumran Cave 1 near the Dead Sea in 1947 were a thousand years earlier than the oldest dated manuscript previously known, they were word-for-word identical with our standard Hebrew Bible in more than 95 percent of the text. The 5 percent of variation consisted chiefly of obvious slips of the pen and variations in spelling.<sup>36</sup>

Though it is not necessary for the Bible to have been transmitted accurately for the miracles it reports to have been true,<sup>37</sup> it is comforting to Christians to see how Bible writers took great care in transmitting their heritage faithfully. Harvard's Simon Greenleaf, still respected as a great nineteenth-century expert on the common law, believed "that the competence of the New Testament documents would be established in any court of law."<sup>38</sup>

Many of the Bible's claims are also established by completely secular sources. Jesus is treated as a historical figure even by early secular historians, including Josephus, who wrote about Jesus at least twice in his *Antiquities of the Jews* (AD 93).<sup>39</sup> Another early historian, Publius Cornelius Tacitus, wrote circa AD 112 about "the persons commonly called Christians" and also stated, "Christus, the founder of the name, was put to death by Pontius Pilate, procurator

<!-- page-278 -->

of Judea in the reign of Tiberius: but the pernicious superstition, repressed for a time broke out again, not only through Judea, where the mischief originated, but through the city of Rome also."<sup>40</sup> According to American biblical scholar Bruce Metzger,

> The early non-Christian testimonies concerning Jesus, though scanty, are sufficient to prove (even without taking into account the evidence contained in the New Testament) that he was a historical figure who lived in Palestine in the early years of the first century, that he gathered a group of followers about himself, and that he was condemned to death under Pontius Pilate. Today no competent scholar denies the historicity of Jesus.<sup>41</sup>

Even secular historian Will Durant accepted the historicity of Jesus and called him in the spiritual sense "the greatest revolutionist in history."<sup>42</sup>

Too, we must remember what we learned in chapter 3, that the miracles reported in the Bible have stood up under empirical examination. Extensive studies of the gospel miracles have found that between half and three-fourths of the miracle accounts include enough detail to conclude that the historical scene they described could, in fact, have occurred as reported.<sup>43</sup> Enough evidence exists that it would be irresponsible to dismiss claims of the miraculous out of a mere bias against supernaturalism.

For the purposes of this chapter, though, let's turn our attention to the one miracle central to the Christian faith: the resurrection of Jesus of Nazareth. The apostle Paul, Christianity's earliest and most successful evangelist, treated the resurrection as the basis of Christianity's validity:

> Now if Christ is proclaimed as raised from the dead, how can some of you say that there is no resurrection of the dead? But if there is no resurrection of the dead, then not even Christ has been raised. And if Christ has not been raised, then our preaching is in vain and your faith is in vain. We are even found to be misrepresenting God, because we testified about God that he raised Christ, whom he did not raise if it is true that the dead are not raised. For if the dead are not raised, not even Christ has been raised. And if Christ has not been raised, your faith is futile and you are still in your sins. Then those also who have fallen asleep in Christ have perished. If in Christ we have hope in this life only, we are of all people most to be pitied. (1 Cor. 15:12–19)

Paul was not alone in emphasizing the resurrection's centrality. Among the gospel writers, Luke carefully situated the crucifixion and resurrection narrative in a "current events" context, mentioning people whose existence and testimony could have been easily verified, such as Pilate, Caesar, Herod, Barabbas, and Joseph of Arimathea. Luke is very concerned with this sort of historical approach (Luke 3:1–2)<sup>44</sup> and describes Christ's resurrection as a real event in history (Luke 24:36ff.).

## 5. Evidence for the Resurrection: The Minimal Facts Approach

So was the resurrection a real event? Many scholars think so, and their careful examina­tion of the resurrection seems to have led to an abandonment of serious efforts to disprove it.

<!-- page-279 -->

Much of this is due to the persistent lifelong work of a philosopher referenced earlier, Gary Habermas. Habermas, a professor at Liberty University, calls his methodology the minimal facts approach and presents it in a book coauthored with Michael Licona:

> **Minimal Facts Approach:** a method formulated by Gary Habermas for investigating the resurrection of Jesus that concentrates only on the historical facts that are so well evidenced that they are accepted by nearly every scholar who studies the topic.

> When presenting the evidence for the Resurrection, let's stick to the topic of Jesus' resurrection. This means that we do not digress into a side discussion on the reliability of the Bible. While we hold that the Bible is trustworthy and inspired, we cannot expect the skeptical nonbeliever with whom we are dialoguing to embrace this view. So, in order to avoid a discussion that may divert us off of our most important topic, we would like to suggest that we adopt a "minimal facts approach." This approach considers only those data that are so strongly attested historically that they are granted by nearly every scholar who studies the subject, even the rather skeptical ones.... Most facts we use meet two criteria: They are well evidenced and nearly every scholar accepts them. We present our case using the "lowest common denominator" of agreed-upon facts. This keeps attention on the central issue, instead of sidetracking into matters that are irrelevant. This way we can present a strong argument that is both supportable and compelling.<sup>45</sup>

So although Habermas does not reject the truth of the Bible as a whole, when it comes to studying the resurrection, he moves beyond questions of the Bible's inspiration or trustworthiness in order to focus on evidence and basic facts that even skeptics acknowledge as legitimate.

Habermas's approach is different from the "appeal to the majority" approach of asking what a majority of biblical scholars might believe. After all, just because a bunch of people believe something doesn't make it true. However, if there are facts that the majority of scholars accept, and if these facts, when taken together, point to a conclusion, then we should take that evidence seriously.

So what are these minimal facts?

**First, Jesus died by crucifixion.** Michael Licona points out that many sources, both Christian and non-Christian, report Jesus's execution, including the four gospels and the works of Josephus, Tacitus, Lucian, and Mara bar Serapion.<sup>46</sup> Each of these authors was familiar with crucifixion and knew the chances of surviving it were, at best, extremely bleak. Licona concludes, "The unanimous professional medical opinion is that Jesus certainly died to the rigors of crucifixion, and even if Jesus had somehow managed to survive crucifixion, it would not have resulted in the disciples' belief that he had been resurrected."<sup>47</sup>

**Second, Jesus's disciples believed that he rose and appeared to them.** Paul testifies to the fact that the disciples believed and claimed it:

<!-- page-280 -->

> I delivered to you as of first importance what I also received: that Christ died for our sins in accordance with the Scriptures, that he was buried, that he was raised on the third day in accordance with the Scriptures, and that he appeared to Cephas [Peter], then to the twelve. Then he appeared to more than five hundred brothers at one time, most of whom are still alive, though some have fallen asleep. Then he appeared to James, then to all of the apostles. Last of all, as to one untimely born, he appeared also to me. (1 Cor. 15:3–8)

In this passage, Paul seems to recite a sort of creed that probably dated back to before his conversion, in the immediate aftermath of Christ's resurrection.<sup>48</sup> Scholars agree that 1 Corinthians was an early book, probably written in the AD 50s at a time when there were potentially many hundreds of people alive who could verify its core truths.

Clearly, the disciples underwent a radical transformation following Jesus's resurrection. They believed so deeply that Jesus had risen from the dead that they devoted the rest of their lives to testifying about it. Lots of people have died for their convictions, but as Habermas points out, "Jesus's disciples were in the right place to know the truth or falsity of the event for which they were willing to die."<sup>49</sup> People often die for what they believe to be true, but it is a rare thing indeed for someone to willingly die for what he *knows* to be false.

**Third, the apostle Paul was radically converted.** What explained the transformation of Paul from highly esteemed persecutor of Christians to promoter of the Christian message?<sup>50</sup> Only one thing: he believed he had seen Jesus.<sup>51</sup> Of course, people convert from one belief to another all the time, but Paul's case was different. Habermas and Licona explain:

> People usually convert to a particular religion because they have heard the message of that religion from a secondary source and believed the message. Paul's conversion was based on what he perceived to be a personal appearance of the risen Jesus. Today we might believe that Jesus rose from the dead based on secondary evidence, trusting Paul and the disciples who saw the risen Jesus. But for Paul, his experience came from primary evidence: the risen Jesus appeared directly to him. He did not merely believe based on the testimony of someone else. Therefore, the difference is primary versus secondary sources. For most, belief is based on secondary sources. And even when religious belief is based on primary grounds, no other founder of a major religion is believed to have been raised from the dead, let alone have provided any evidence for such an event.<sup>52</sup>

**Fourth, the skeptic James, brother of Jesus, was suddenly changed.** Gospel accounts indicate that Jesus's brothers, including James, were unbelievers who did not hold to the truth of Jesus's message.<sup>53</sup> In the book of Acts, however, James is mentioned as one of the leaders of the church in Jerusalem.<sup>54</sup> What happened? The ancient creed we referred to earlier mentions Jesus's appearing to James. Simply put, James apparently converted to Christianity because he believed that Jesus appeared to him after rising from the dead. How much did he believe this? According to Habermas and Licona,

<!-- page-281 -->

> His beliefs in Jesus and his resurrection were so strong that he died as a martyr because of them. James's martyrdom is attested by Josephus, Hegesippus, and Clement of Alexandria. We no longer have any of the works of Hegesippus or the writings of Clement where the event is mentioned. However, sections have been preserved by Eusebius. Therefore, his martyrdom is attested by both Christian and non-Christian sources.<sup>55</sup>

It is difficult to explain these facts apart from the resurrection. Where did Jesus's body end up? Why were so many changed? And why did they all risk their lives? There simply isn't a sufficient naturalistic answer.

## 6. Additional Evidence for the Resurrection

There are also other compelling arguments scholars have advanced that, although not meeting the minimal facts criteria, are nonetheless intriguing.

**First, the tomb was empty.** This conclusion is slightly less attested by the majority of scholars but is still a powerful piece of evidence because Jesus's execution was a public event. If Jesus's body had still been in the tomb, it would have been easy for his enemies to display the corpse and expose the claims of resurrection to be a hoax.<sup>56</sup>

> If Jesus's body had still been in the tomb, it would have been easy for his enemies to display the corpse and expose the claims of resurrection to be a hoax.

Also, it's not only Jesus's friends who report the empty tomb but also Jesus's enemies (though they thought the disciples stole the body). From all the available evidence, the tomb was empty.<sup>57</sup> Here's something more: the emptiness of the tomb was first witnessed by women. In the Near Eastern culture of Jesus's time, in both Jewish and Roman traditions, the testimony of women was not considered strong evidence.<sup>58</sup> William Lane Craig says,

> If the empty tomb story were a legend, then the male disciples would have been made to be the ones who discover the empty tomb. The fact that women, whose testimony was deemed worthless, were the chief witnesses to the fact of the empty tomb can only be plausibly explained if, like it or not, they actually were the discoverers of the empty tomb, and the gospels faithfully record what for them was a very embarrassing fact.<sup>59</sup>

New Testament scholar N. T. Wright examined the evidence for the empty tomb and said, "We are left with the secure historical conclusion: the tomb was empty.... I regard this conclusion as coming in the same category, of historical probability so high as to be virtually certain, as the death of Augustus in AD 14 or the fall of Jerusalem in AD 70."<sup>60</sup> This is a powerful statement from a respected scholar whose book *The Resurrection of the Son of God* is must reading for anyone wanting to seriously examine the evidence for the resurrection.<sup>61</sup>

<!-- page-282 -->

**Second, more than five hundred people witnessed the resurrected Christ (1 Cor. 15:6),<sup>62</sup> including Mary, Peter, and ten apostles, and it changed their lives.** These witnesses were so moved by what they had experienced that they committed their lives to it and to the One whose divinity and righteousness it vindicated. The disciples did not abandon Christ (as they might have, because death by crucifixion was, according to their expectations, a sure sign of a failed messiah) but instead were willing to die for the gospel they were proclaiming because the resurrection absolutely defied their expectations. Indeed, the resurrection of Christ took a group of scared (Mark 16:8; John 20:19)<sup>63</sup> and skeptical (Luke 24:38; John 20:25)<sup>64</sup> men and transformed them into courageous evangelists who proclaimed that resurrection in the face of threats on their lives (Acts 4:21; 5:18).<sup>65</sup> It must have taken quite a life-shaping event to do that.

How do nonbelievers respond to this evidence? The most common response is that the disciples genuinely believed all this because they were hallucinating. But as Licona points out, this explanation simply does not hold water:

> Since a hallucination is an event that occurs in the mind of an individual and has no external reality, one person cannot participate in another's hallucination. In this sense, they are like dreams. I could not wake my wife in the middle of the night and say, "Honey, I'm having a dream that I'm in Hawaii. Go back to sleep. Come join me in my dream and let's have a free vacation!" We might go back to sleep and both dream that we are in Hawaii. But we would not be participating in the same dream, doing the same activity, in the same location, and carrying on the same discussion with precisely the same words. This is because a dream occurs in the mind of an individual and has no corresponding external reality. Hallucinations are similar in that sense as a psychological phenomenon.<sup>66</sup>

In fact, Licona points to the research of Dr. Gary Sibcy, a clinical psychologist who has studied the possibility of group hallucinations. Sibcy says,

> I have surveyed the professional literature (peer-reviewed journal articles and books) written by psychologists, psychiatrists, and other relevant healthcare professionals during the past two decades and have yet to find a single documented case of a group hallucination, that is, an event for which more than one person purportedly shared in a visual or other sensory perception where there was clearly no external referent.<sup>67</sup>

Still, even if the disciples hallucinated, faulty sight doesn't change the facts:<sup>68</sup> the tomb was empty and hundreds of people apparently saw Jesus alive.

**Third, the theology of the disciples was drastically changed.** Apart from the resurrection, the disciples' theology makes no sense at all. Nothing short of a miracle could have so radically altered the theology they had grown up with all their lives. William Lane Craig explains:

> Jews had no conception of a Messiah who, instead of triumphing over Israel's enemies, would be shamefully executed by them as a criminal. Messiah was supposed

<!-- page-283 -->

> to be a triumphant figure who would command the respect of Jew and Gentile alike and who would establish the throne of David in Jerusalem. A Messiah who failed to deliver and to reign, who was defeated, humiliated, and slain by His enemies, is a contradiction in terms. Nowhere do Jewish texts speak of such a "Messiah." Therefore, it's difficult to overemphasize what a disaster the crucifixion was for the disciples' faith. Jesus' death on the cross spelled the humiliating end for any hopes they had entertained that He was the Messiah. But the belief in the resurrection of Jesus reversed the catastrophe of the crucifixion.<sup>69</sup>

Clearly, something immensely powerful happened, that the disciples immediately developed a whole new theological tradition for which they were mocked, persecuted, and even put to death by both Jewish and Roman authorities. The Bible is clear about what this "something" is: Christ had risen from the dead. As New Testament scholar N. T. Wright puts it,

> The widespread belief and practice of the early Christians is only explicable if we assume that they all believed that Jesus was bodily raised, in an Easter event something like the stories the gospels tell: the reason they believed that he was bodily raised is because the tomb was empty and, over a short period thereafter, they encountered Jesus himself, giving every appearance of being bodily alive once more.<sup>70</sup>

The resurrection of Christ seriously challenges those who attempt to explain all reality through materialism, and it provides enticing evidence of a supernatural event that changed hundreds of lives instantly and billions more ever since.

> The resurrection of Christ seriously challenges those who attempt to explain all reality through materialism, and it provides enticing evidence of a supernatural event that changed hundreds of lives instantly and billions more ever since.

Let's take a moment to review. So far we've seen that the bias against miracles is an assumption about the way the world works that simply does not hold up. The evidence for miracles, especially in the miracle of the resurrection of Jesus, is strong.

What is the impact of all of this evidence? Like the disciples, we are enabled to be more firmly committed to believing that the gospel is true and spreading its good news. But it is more than that. Having confidence in the miraculous accounts of the Bible enables us to see with complete clarity that God is powerful *today* and operating in the world to empower us to live like Christ and resist evil.

As we'll discuss in a future chapter, I have found as a teacher that whenever the subject of miracles comes up, the question of evil follows quickly on its heels. People ask, "What about supernatural evil, such as Satan and demons?" Although it is not a central issue we are covering in this book, the reality of the existence of supernatural evil and Jesus's power over it is too big of a topic to ignore. First we need to understand what it is, then see how Jesus conquers it, and finally discern how we ourselves might pursue good and resist evil in our own world today.

<!-- page-284 -->

## 7. The Reality of Supernatural Evil

Many of Jesus's miracles were the healing of physical ailments. Uncomfortably for modern people, the Gospels clearly record several instances in which these ailments were the result of supernatural evil. One account, recorded among others in Luke 8:26–29, reports how Jesus and the disciples sailed to a region called the Gerasenes and met a demon-possessed man whom Jesus subsequently healed.<sup>71</sup> Another such incident, recorded in Luke 13:10–11, is of a woman with a disabling spirit that left her body hunched and crooked.<sup>72</sup>

The biblical account clearly assumes that Satan is at work in the world. This very thought drives materialists/naturalists to scorn. For people who believe, as evolutionist Julian Huxley did, that "modern science must rule out special creation or divine guidance,"<sup>73</sup> possession by evil spirits is simply beyond the pale.

We talked earlier about how people in the past had more of a sense of spiritual connection with one another, God, and nature. It is as if they lived in a world we would now refer to as "enchanted": permeated with the supernatural in everyday life. Many people today think unbelief is a step forward and should be our default position. As philosopher Charles Taylor frames it,

> Many people today think unbelief is a step forward and should be our default position.

> Unbelief for great numbers of contemporary unbelievers, is understood as an achievement of rationality. It cannot have this without a continuing historical awareness. It is a condition which can't only be described in the present tense, but which also needs the perfect tense: a condition of "having overcome" the irrationality of belief. It is this perfect-tensed consciousness which underlies unbelievers' use of "disenchantment" today.<sup>74</sup>

For materialists/naturalists, the residue of enchantment is a serious problem: society cannot advance until people become sufficiently disenchanted with spiritual things.

Many Christians, in an attempt to meet the challenge of materialism/naturalism, try to explain things such as demon possession in terms that seem more scientifically acceptable, such as mental illness. Other Christian counselors, such as Jay Adams, strongly resist this approach:

> Organic malfunctions affecting the brain that are caused by brain damage, tumors, gene inheritance, glandular or chemical disorders validly may be termed mental illnesses. But at the same time a vast number of other human problems have been classified as mental illnesses for which there is no evidence that they have been engendered by disease or illness at all.<sup>75</sup>

Adams believes that proper biblical teaching and repentance can help people heal: "The fundamental bent of fallen human nature is away from God.... Apart from organically generated difficulties, the 'mentally ill' are really people with unsolved personal problems."<sup>76</sup> This is obviously a controversial position even among Christians in the mental health professions. But even if it does not account for more common approaches to mental illness, it at least highlights the fact that if what the Bible says about our rebellion against

<!-- page-285 -->

God is true, reconciling with him is critical to healthy functioning. Christian counselor Larry Crabb Jr. explains, "An appreciation of the reality of sin is a critically necessary beginning point for an understanding of the Christian view of anything. A psychology worthy of the adjective 'Christian' must not set the problem of sin in parallel with other problems or redefine it into a neurosis or psychological kink."<sup>77</sup>

> If supernatural evil actually exists but isn't easily explained as mental illness, then what is it? We need to know what we're up against. As pastor and author Karl Payne says in his respected book on spiritual warfare, "Ignorance of a competitor is not an advantage in athletics, business, or spiritual warfare."

If supernatural evil actually exists but isn't easily explained as mental illness, then what is it? We need to know what we're up against. As pastor and author Karl Payne says in his respected book on spiritual warfare, "Ignorance of a competitor is not an advantage in athletics, business, or spiritual warfare."<sup>78</sup>

Theologian C. Fred Dickason explains what we're up against. A theologian who has carefully studied what the Bible says about supernatural evil, he describes demon possession based on the meaning of the terms used in the original New Testament Greek:

> The verb *daimonizomai* means "to be possessed by a demon." The participle from the same root, *daimonizomenos*, is used twelve times in the Greek New Testament. It is used only in the present tense, indicating the continued state of one inhabited by a demon, or demonized. This participle has components to its structure. First there is the root, *daimon*, which indicates the involvement of demons. Second is the causative stem, *iz*, which shows that there is an active cause in this verb. Third is the passive ending, *omenos*. This conveys the passivity of the person described as demonized. Putting it all together, the participle in its root form means, "a demon caused passivity." This indicates a control other than that of the person who is demonized; he is regarded as the recipient of the demon's action. In other words, demonization pictures a demon controlling a somewhat passive human.<sup>79</sup>

To Dickason, when people are passive in the face of supernatural evil, they actually put themselves in the position of being controlled by it. In other words, it isn't just actively doing the wrong thing that is the problem; it is the failure to do the *right* thing that also constitutes sin. Why do people such as the apostle Paul and the gospel writers treat Satan's influence so seriously? This is where the theology of the gospel really comes to life in an exciting way. Let's take a look.

## 8. The Presence of Supernatural Evil Highlights the Power of Jesus

In our own day, people have many superstitions. For example, even though every building more than twelve stories tall has a thirteenth floor, often the number thirteen is skipped so those riding the elevator can blissfully go straight to the "fourteenth floor." Why? The

<!-- page-286 -->

number thirteen is so widely considered to be bad luck that very few people would agree to have offices or stay in a hotel room on the thirteenth floor.

The people of Israel had superstitions too, but they were much more involved with the worship of a god named **Baal**. Baal worship fills the Old Testament. He was the main false god people worshipped, and the prophets constantly warned that this kind of worship would weaken people spiritually so much that they would lose everything, including their freedom as a nation. This is exactly what happened.

> **Baal:** meaning "Lord" or "ruler"; a false god worshipped by the people of Israel who was purported to control nature.

In the New Testament, the references to Satan are from the word **Beelzebub** in the Greek, a variation on the name Baal, which refers to the prince of the demons.<sup>80</sup> Beelzebub literally means "Lord of the flies," which is interesting to those who have read William Golding's book by that title. To the Hebrews, it was an ironic reference: Satan was Lord over the dung heap.

> **Beelzebub:** a Greek word meaning "Lord of the flies"; references Satan and is a variation of the false god Baal.

Because the word *Baal* really meant "Lord" or "ruler," the name seems to refer in ancient Near East literature to many different local deities and thus many diverse traditions. For our purposes, we should understand that people's *impressions* of Baal were all the scarier for being vague. He was widely believed in, if not worshipped. His power was thought to be real. By piecing together various Baal traditions, we can see the attributes Baal was thought to have:

- Baal is the one who made things grow. He was in charge of fertility.<sup>81</sup>
- Baal was the god of storms and ruler of the seas.<sup>82</sup>
- Baal worship was thought to involve the sacrifice of pigs.<sup>83</sup>
- Worshippers of Baal would scream and cut themselves and stay among the tombs.<sup>84</sup>
- Baal was the son of the great god El. He was son of the "Most High God."<sup>85</sup>

> Understanding the superstitions about Baal is crucial to seeing how Jesus's miracles directly confronted the dominant, but mistaken, belief that supernatural evil was more powerful than supernatural good.

Understanding the superstitions about Baal is crucial to seeing how Jesus's miracles directly confronted the dominant, but mistaken, belief that supernatural evil was more powerful than supernatural good.

Returning to the story referenced at the beginning of this section, when Jesus traveled to the country of the Gerasenes (modern-day Jordan), we see that Jesus's miracles surrounding this trip directly confronted the power of Baal. In Mark chapter 4, Jesus fed a crowd of many thousands of people by multiplying a small lunch. The lesson was clear: Jesus, not Baal, makes things grow. He can feed people out of thin air if he chooses to do so.

<!-- page-287 -->

Immediately after this mass feeding, Jesus traveled with his disciples across the Sea of Galilee. Mark 4 recounts how the sea grew tempestuous and the disciples were afraid. Perhaps, as they were headed to the mysterious Gerasenes, they wondered in the back of their minds whether Baal-the-storm-god had anything to do with it. Given their fear, the storm must have seemed like a bad omen. When Jesus caused the storm to cease, the disciples became even more overwhelmed. Mark 4:41 says, "They were filled with great fear and said to one another, 'Who then is this, that even the wind and the sea obey him?'" The lesson? Jesus, not Baal, controls the weather.

Finally the disciples arrived in the Gerasenes and, according to Mark 5:1–20, experienced a terrifying sight: a wild man living among the tombs who could not be subdued and who cried out and cut himself with stones. Seeing Jesus, the man cried out with a loud voice, "What have you to do with me, Jesus, Son of the Most High God? I adjure you by God, do not torment me." Jesus asked his name and he replied, "My name is Legion, for we are many." These spirits implored him to send them out of the country but to have them enter a herd of two thousand pigs, which subsequently stampeded and drowned in the sea. Hearing of this, the townspeople came and saw the demoniac "clothed and in his right mind" and were terrified.

Put yourself in the place of the disciples, the people of the Gerasenes, or even the demoniac himself. Everyone was terrified. They were in the presence of evil things they had heard about all their lives but probably didn't imagine they would personally witness. Perhaps they were thinking of the account in 1 Kings 18, in which the prophets of Baal tried to make it rain by running around, screaming, and cutting themselves just as the Gerasene demoniac did.<sup>86</sup> Or perhaps they were thinking of Isaiah condemning those who lived among the tombs and worshipped false gods, like the demon-possessed man at Gerasene.

But when the demons plaguing the tormented man called Jesus the "Son of the Most High God," the disciples must have just about come apart. Even the *demons* knew that Baal wasn't the true God; Jesus was. When Jesus sent the demons into the pigs, it was an almost ghastly but humorous action. It's as if Jesus was saying, "Baal, you like pigs? I'll give you pigs." The poor people of the Gerasenes simply did not know what to do about all this. What truly frightened them was not that demons had killed their pigs but that the demoniac who could not even be chained for his own good had been set free from all that chained him to evil. He was clothed. He was in his right mind, but they nearly lost theirs.

> When the demons plaguing the tormented man called Jesus the "Son of the Most High God," the disciples must have just about come apart. Even the *demons* knew that Baal wasn't the true God; Jesus was.

In explanation of the convergence of the biblical text with the superstitions of Jesus's day, Bible teacher Paul T. Penley comments, "When Jesus performed the exorcism, he was not just casting out a bunch of demons to demonstrate his own authority. He was challenging the mythical authority that Baal claimed to have acquired over the inhabitants of the underworld. Jesus is showing himself to be the true Lord over all in place of Baal."<sup>87</sup>

But there is one more reference of great significance: the Gerasene demoniac became an evangelist. According to the text, the man asked to go with Jesus and the disciples. Instead, Jesus sent him to proclaim the gospel in the Decapolis, which means "ten cities." We know the names of these cities because a Roman historian named Pliny the Elder (AD 23–79) wrote

<!-- page-288 -->

about them. One is a city called Philadelphia, which is now Amman, the capital of Jordan. Another is Damascus, the capital of Syria. Both cities figure prominently in Middle Eastern politics to this day. The Gerasene demoniac must have been quite an evangelist, or maybe his converts were. From the second century AD to modern times, the Decapolis has been known as a thoroughly Christian region.<sup>88</sup>

So supernatural evil is real, but Jesus is more powerful than all its forces. As Martin Luther wrote, Satan's "doom is sure. One little word will fell him."<sup>89</sup> That word is Jesus, the very one who, in instantly converting the demoniac into an evangelist, turned evil against itself. This is the hope of which Paul speaks when he says that God will crush Satan under our feet (Rom. 16:20).<sup>90</sup> "Our feet" seems like an ever-present reference, something that continues to this day. So what does supernatural evil—and its being crushed by God's people—look like today?

## 9. How Supernatural Evil Manifests Today

When they hear stories of supernatural activity in other countries, Westerners often ask, *Why don't we see more of that here?* Given the extensive research of such people as Craig Keener, who documents encounters with supernatural evil, including many that can be verified with scientific evidence, it would appear that miracles and demonic activity are taking place all over the world today. If we don't see it, maybe we just aren't paying attention. At a deeper level, though, the materialist assumption that only the physical world exists is so much a part of our everyday lives that it conditions us to "not see" things that don't fit our preconceived notions. If everything can be explained through natural causes, then we might just assign some natural cause to it without even stopping to think about it.<sup>91</sup>

> The materialist assumption that only the physical world exists is so much a part of our everyday lives that it conditions us to "not see" things that don't fit our preconceived notions. If everything can be explained through natural causes, then we might just assign some natural cause to it without even stopping to think about it.

When we encounter a disruptive phenomenon, our human tendency is to try to make sense of it based on what we already know.<sup>92</sup> Often we simply fail to notice things we do not think can happen. Once a skeptic said to me, "If God is so powerful, why doesn't he just get a huge megaphone and announce his existence to the whole world?" The person seemed serious, so I gave a serious reply: "First of all, God doesn't operate that way. Second, you seem so predisposed to naturalism that I don't even think you would grasp what was happening if God did that. You'd probably interpret it as an odd burst of thunder." This is exactly what happened in Jesus's day when God spoke aloud (John 12:27–36). The people were predisposed not to hear God's voice, so they interpreted it as thunder.

C. S. Lewis incorporated this point into his book *The Magician's Nephew*. Stumbling into Narnia and captured by the Narnian animals, Uncle Andrew hears only barks and howls when they are speaking, and snarling when they are laughing. Lewis writes, "What you see and what you hear depends a great deal on where you are standing. It also depends on what sort of person you are."<sup>93</sup> It is true in our understanding of God as well.

<!-- page-289 -->

Christians can also unknowingly trivialize the presence of evil. At a camp I directed, two students had been telling one another stories of demonic activity, when all at once the faucet in their room turned on. They were terrified. Upon further examination, though, the faucet had not been turned all the way off, and vibrating pipes from water flow in nearby rooms had just enough pressure to allow a small stream of water to pass through. With their scary talk, these students had convinced themselves that they were under demonic attack, and they interpreted everything they saw and heard from that perspective. Just as Uncle Andrew found himself unable to witness the supernatural anywhere, the students seemed to observe it everywhere.

> Perhaps we don't see more demonic activity in the West because Satan doesn't need drama in order to succeed.

But there is one more possibility: perhaps we don't see more demonic activity in the West because Satan doesn't need drama in order to succeed. Karl Payne claims, "The bottom line is that subtle covert attacks in our society are usually more effective than aggressive overt attacks that could possibly wake up even the most religious skeptics to question the reality, relevance, and correctness of spiritual faith, doctrinal presuppositions, and theistic worldviews."<sup>94</sup> Don't forget, though, that demon influence does not need to manifest through wild-eyed screams or guttural voices. Demonic activity wearing the ordinary garb of doubt, irrational fear, and self-accusation would almost never be perceived as such and could spread like a virus. Payne thinks this is exactly what is happening: "I personally believe that demonic deception is increasing, even within the Christian church, and that the worst of this deception is still to come."<sup>95</sup>

Deception. It's the most common garb of the demonic. As C. S. Lewis wrote in *The Screwtape Letters* (from the Devil's perspective), "It is funny how mortals always picture us as putting things into their minds: in reality our best work is done by keeping things out."<sup>96</sup> Or, to quote Kevin Spacey's character in *The Usual Suspects*, "The greatest trick the devil ever played was to convince the world he didn't exist."<sup>97</sup> Materialism, self-sufficiency, even a denial of Satan's existence can be demonic.

The scriptural response to the enemy of our souls is to resist him and he will flee (James 4:7).<sup>98</sup> The New Testament, according to Dr. Dickason, regards demons as usurpers, squatters, thieves—those who do not own anything and have no right to any territory but act as if they do.<sup>99</sup> Christians are bought with a price by God (1 Cor. 6:20),<sup>100</sup> and demons can't change that. They can, however, make Christians miserable and cause them to be ineffective ambassadors for God's kingdom.

Asking, "Why don't we see more demonic activity here?" is sort of like asking, "Why isn't life more like a horror movie?" It's the wrong question. The right question is "How do we recognize demonic activity for what it is and resist it?"

## 10. Conclusion

Admittedly, this chapter has been a bit unusual. We began with the question of whether supernatural good and evil actually exist. We identified the materialist/naturalist bias that prevents us from recognizing the supernatural and responded to the claims of such philoso­phers as David Hume that miracles cannot occur and therefore do not. We saw that evidence

<!-- page-290 -->

for miracles is strong and that the miracle of Jesus's resurrection serves as an example of a miracle that can be confidently asserted to have actually occurred.

We also looked at the existence of supernatural evil and realized that even though many people are uncomfortable with discussions of Satan, demons, and demon possession, we have good reason to take supernatural evil seriously. Fortunately, as we also saw, Jesus is the Lord over all and has shown himself to be more powerful than any evil we might encounter.

Choosing to believe in the supernatural, then, does not make us second-class thinkers. As William Lane Craig states,

> Fortunately, the Christian faith does not call for us to put our minds on the shelf, to fly in the face of common sense and history, or to make a leap of faith into the dark. The rational person, fully apprised of the evidence, can confidently believe that on that first Easter morning a divine miracle took place.<sup>101</sup>

But confidence is not the only goal. If the supernatural world actually exists, it must color our whole understanding of reality, including what we think about the power of evil. As the Old Testament prophet Elisha told his terrified servant, "Do not be afraid, for those who are with us are more than those who are with them" (2 Kings 6:16). Similarly, Romans 8:31 says, "What then shall we say to these things? If God is for us, who can be against us?"

> If the supernatural world actually exists, it must color our whole understanding of reality, including what we think about the power of evil.

At the end of the day, it is hard to see the supernatural because we find ourselves incapable of paying attention to things that don't fit our preconceived notions of what's possible. The Bible encourages us to be unafraid and yet deeply aware that the world, the flesh, and the Devil tempt us to ignore or avoid what God says is good for us.

Five actions are called for to counter "the desires of the flesh and the desires of the eyes and pride of life" (1 John 2:16):<sup>102</sup>

1. **Pursue good.** Matthew 6:24 says, "No one can serve two masters, for either he will hate the one and love the other, or he will be devoted to the one and despise the other." So we must say, "I choose to see this from God's perspective rather than from my own."

2. **Resist evil.** Second Timothy 2:22 tells us to "flee youthful passions and pursue righteousness, faith, love, and peace, along with those who call on the Lord from a pure heart." We have to change our habits and intentionally avoid situations in which we might experience temptation.

3. **Renew our minds.** Ephesians 4:22–24 says, "Put off your old self, which belongs to your former manner of life and is corrupt through deceitful desires, and to be renewed in the spirit of your minds, and to put on the new self, created after the likeness of God in true righteousness and holiness." When we are tempted to believe things about ourselves that God says are not true or to perform actions that are not godly, our response needs to be "This is not me. I belong to God. I do not need to comply with Satan's thinking or agenda."

<!-- page-291 -->

4. **Walk controlled by the Spirit.** Galatians 5:16 says, "I say, walk by the Spirit, and you will not gratify the desires of the flesh." As Payne says, "Part of the Holy Spirit's job is to convict us of sin so that we can get back to serving Jesus Christ."<sup>103</sup> It is appropriate to listen to these convictions and be restored to the way God wants us to walk.

5. **Repent.** Although temptation is not itself sin, succumbing to it is, as is believing we are invulnerable to it. As the apostle Peter told a man who wanted to buy spiritual power with money, "Repent, therefore, of this wickedness of yours, and pray to the Lord that, if possible, the intent of your heart may be forgiven you" (Acts 8:22). Repentance clears away sin's power over us.

To have victory over evil, we need a heightened sense of awareness to what's actually going on around us. Psychiatrist Curt Thompson encourages us to ask, "How well am I paying attention to what I am paying attention to?"<sup>104</sup> If we merely absorb the culture's messages or if we believe we're stuck in our past and its patterns of life, we'll probably never experience genuine spiritual success. As Thompson says, "Your memory creates your future."<sup>105</sup>

In order to pay attention to God's power, we have been given the mind of Christ. The apostle Paul said in 1 Corinthians 2:10–16,

> We have received not the spirit of the world, but the Spirit who is from God, that we might understand the things freely given us by God. And we impart this in words not taught by human wisdom but taught by the Spirit, interpreting spiritual truths to those who are spiritual. The natural person does not accept the things of the Spirit of God, for they are folly to him, and he is not able to understand them because they are spiritually discerned.... But we have the mind of Christ.

Therein is victory: that we see the world as God sees it, that we respond as he responds. We must remember this as we turn our attention in the next chapter to a subject that has bothered many people in the modern world: no matter how interesting we find claims about the supernatural, isn't it true that science has pretty much won the battle with Christianity over what is actually true?

> Therein is victory: that we see the world as God sees it, that we respond as he responds.

## Endnotes

1. Letter from Thomas Jefferson to John Adams (October 12, 1813), www.encyclopediavirginia.org/Letter_from_Thomas_Jefferson_to_John_Adams_October_12_1813.
2. Timothy Keller, *The Reason for God: Belief in an Age of Skepticism* (New York: Dutton, 2008), 95.
3. Consider some passages in the Quran (A. Yusuf Ali, *The Holy Qur'an*) regarding Moses: "[Pharaoh] said: 'If indeed thou hast come with a Sign, show it forth, if thou tellest the truth.' Then [Moses] threw his rod, and behold, it was white to all beholders! And he drew out his hand, and behold, it was white to all beholders!" (7:106–7). "Said Moses [to the sorcerers of Pharaoh's court]: 'Throw ye (first).' So when they threw, they bewitched the eyes of the people, and struck terror into them: for they showed a great (feat of) magic. We put it into Moses' mind by inspiration: 'Throw (now) thy rod'; and behold, it swallows up straightaway all the falsehoods which they fake! Thus truth was confirmed and all that they did was made of no effect" (7:116–18). "Then we sent Moses and his brother Aaron, and with Our Signs and Authority manifest" (23:45). See also 7:106–8.
4. The Quran states, "O Jesus the son of Mary! Recount My favour to thee and to thy mother ... and behold, thou bringest forth the dead by My leave. And thou healest those born blind, and the lepers, by My leave" (5:110). The Quran also states, "We gave Jesus, the son of Mary, Clear Signs and strengthened him ... and We restrained the Children of Israel from (violence to) thee" (2:87).
5. A. Yusuf Ali, *The Holy Qur'an*.
6. Oliver Leaman, *An Introduction to Classical Islamic Philosophy* (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2002), 102.
7. Blaise Pascal, *Pensées*, no. 600, www.ccel.org/ccel/pascal/pensees.x.html.
8. Eric Metaxas, *Miracles: What They Are, Why They Happen, and How They Can Change Your Life* (New York: Dutton, 2014), 16.
9. Stephen T. Davis, "God's Actions," in *In Defense of Miracles: A Comprehensive Case for God's Action in History*, ed. R. Douglas Geivett and Gary R. Habermas (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity, 1997), 165.
10. R. Douglas Geivett, *The Equator: A Journey around the World*, vol. 5 (New York: Harper and Brothers, 1906), 132.
11. Clearly speaking, materialism is in the realm of *metaphysics*, the philosophical study of being. It hypothesizes about what exists. Naturalism is in the realm of *epistemology*, the philosophical study of knowing. These terms have been discussed and debated in one form or another for millennia, so any one definition of them risks being overly simplistic. Those interested in delving more deeply may find a good starting point in Robert Audi, ed., *Cambridge Dictionary of Philosophy* (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1999). See specifically the definition of *materialism* (p. 63) and the definition of *naturalism* (p. 596).
12. Richard C. Lewontin, "Billions and Billions of Demons," *The New York Review of Books*, January 9, 1997.
13. Edward O. Wilson, "Biology's Spiritual Products," *Free Inquiry* (1987): 14.
14. Rebecca Hamilton, "Dawkins: Mock Them. Ridicule Them. In Public. With Contempt." *Patheos*, July 31, 2013, www.patheos.com/blogs/publiccatholic/2013/07/dawkins-mock-them-ridicule-them-in-public-with-contempt/.
15. I recognize that this is one of many prominent interpretations of what Hume was doing in his essay on miracles, but for our purposes, it is not possible to discuss each one and decide among them.
16. Sean McDowell and Jonathan Morrow, *Is God Just a Human Invention? And Seventeen Other Questions Raised by the New Atheists* (Grand Rapids, MI: Kregel, 2010), 48–49.
17. C. S. Lewis, *Miracles* (New York: Macmillan, 1947), 105.
18. McDowell and Morrow, *Is God Just a Human Invention?*, 49.
19. McDowell and Morrow, *Is God Just a Human Invention?*, 49.
20. Craig Keener, *Miracles: The Credibility of the New Testament Accounts* (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker, 2011).
21. G. K. Chesterton, *Orthodoxy* (New York: John Lane Company, 1908), 278.
22. Julian Huxley, *Essays of a Humanist* (New York: Harper and Row, 1964), 107.
23. Specifically, Taylor found that it is only in the last five hundred years or so that people have gotten the sense of a "self" that is "buffered" and clearly distinct from others. In other words, the focus on knowledge that is individually developed and individually held is a relatively recent phenomenon. This is important because the bias toward the individual is one thing that convinces us that what we used to know together is no longer relevant. Disenchantment rises as individualism replaces community. Charles Taylor, *A Secular Age* (Cambridge, MA: Belknap, 2007), 38–39.
24. Hunter Baker, *The End of Secularism* (Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2009), 153.
25. We use the term *dualism* for the sake of simplicity. The precise term philosophers use for this is *substance dualism*.
26. See, for example, the work of the esteemed sociologist Peter L. Berger. Early in his career, Berger predicted the rise of Secularism and the death of religion. Through time, Berger now admits, the evidence has demonstrated precisely the opposite of what he originally supposed. A well-known article from Berger on the subject is "Secularization Falsified," *First Things*, February 2008. A recent interview with Berger can be found at thecresset.org/2014/Lent/Thuswaldner_L14.html.
27. Thomas Nagel, *Mind and Cosmos: Why the Materialist Neo-Darwinian Conception of Nature is Almost Certainly False* (New York: Oxford University Press, 2012), 6. On pages 14 and 15 he says, "If evolutionary biology is a physical theory—as it is generally taken to be—then it cannot account for the appearance of consciousness and other phenomena that are not physically reducible."
28. Craig Calhoun, Mark Juergensmeyer, and Jonathan VanAntwerpen, eds., *Rethinking Secularism* (New York: Oxford University Press, 2011).
29. Eben Alexander, *Proof of Heaven: A Neurosurgeon's Journey into the Afterlife* (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2012).
30. This is the conclusion reached by Gary Habermas, a theologian and philosopher who has collected and examined Near-Death Experiences that he believes are impossible to explain by materialism and naturalism alone. Dr. Habermas's website, www.garyhabermas.com, features dozens of well-documented articles as well as audio and video interviews.
31. Although a changed life is not proof of an idea's truth, it can be powerful evidence that makes us stop and think about what an experience with God can be like. That people seem to be changed forever when they encounter the supernatural inspired Robert J. Spitzer to include Near-Death Experiences among the new proofs for God he discusses in his book *New Proofs for the Existence of God: Contributions of Contemporary Physics and Philosophy* (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 2010). Of the experience of the divine sense, he says, "One might think that the experience of God would lead to fear of the immense, uncontrollable Creator-Other; but in fact the experience of the divine seems to be quite different. Despite the immensity and uncontrollable otherness of God, there seems to be a joy, love, and quieting of the human heart so profound that they transform what might have been an alienating otherness into a sense of perfect Home" (285).
32. Alex Tsakiris, "112: Christian Apologist Dr. Gary Habermas Skeptical of Near Death Experience Spirituality" (includes an interview with Gary Habermas), *Skeptiko*, August 31, 2010, www.skeptiko.com/112-gary-habermas-skeptical-of-near-death-experience-spirituality/.
33. It is worth noting that some Christians are skeptical because some reports include things that seem inconsistent with biblical testimony. Although we ought respectfully to listen to such reports, we needn't accept them as valid. As Habermas points it, "Just because there's a supernatural world it doesn't mean that everything that's supernatural has equally good data in its favor" (Tsakiris, "112: Christian Apologist Dr. Gary Habermas"). As with all experiences, we need to measure everything against a reliable standard of truth. See also Gary R. Habermas, "Near Death Experiences and Worldview Concerns: Addressing Difficult Questions," *Areopagus Journal* 11, no. 4 (Fall, 2011).
34. Molly Edmonds, "Is the Brain Hardwired for Religion?," *How Stuff Works*, http://science.howstuffworks.com/life/inside-the-mind/human-brain/brain-religion2.htm.
35. Albright said, "In my opinion, every book of the New Testament was written by a baptized Jew between the forties and the eighties of the first century (very probably sometime between about A.D. 50 and 75)" (W. F. Albright, "Toward a More Conservative View," in *Christianity Today* [January 18, 1963]: 3).
36. Gleason L. Archer Jr., *A Survey of Old Testament Introduction* (Chicago: Moody, 1968), 1.
37. This is called the minimal facts approach, and it is explained in greater detail later in this chapter.
38. John Warwick Montgomery, *Human Rights and Human Dignity* (Dallas: Probe, 1986), 137.
39. In one instance, Josephus recorded that the high priest Annas "assembled the Sanhedrin of the judges, and brought before them the brother of Jesus, who was called Christ, whose name was James." Flavius Josephus, *Antiquities of the Jews; A History of the Jewish Wars; and Life of Flavius Josephus, Written By Himself*, trans. William Whiston (Philadelphia: Jas. B. Smith, 1858), 439.
40. Cornelius Tacitus, *Annals* XV, 44, quoted in Josh McDowell, *Evidence That Demands a Verdict: Historical Evidence for the Christian Faith* (San Bernardino, CA: Campus Crusade for Christ International, 1972), 84.
41. Bruce M. Metzger, *The New Testament: Its Background, Growth, and Content* (Nashville: Abingdon, 1965), 78.
42. Will Durant, *Caesar and Christ: A History of Roman Civilization and of Christianity from Their Beginnings to A.D. 325*, Story of Civilization, bk. 3 (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1944), 566.
43. See John P. Meier, *A Marginal Jew: Rethinking the Historical Jesus*, vol. 2 (New York: Doubleday, 1994); Graham H. Twelftree, *Jesus the Miracle Worker: A Historical and Theological Study* (Downers Grove, IL: IVP Academic, 1999).
44. Luke 3:1–2: "In the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar, Pontius Pilate being governor of Judea, and Herod being tetrarch of Galilee, and his brother Philip tetrarch of the region of Ituraea and Trachonitis, and Lysanias tetrarch of Abilene, during the high priesthood of Annas and Caiaphas, the word of God came to John the son of Zechariah in the wilderness."
45. Gary R. Habermas and Michael R. Licona, *The Case for the Resurrection of Jesus* (Grand Rapids, MI: Kregel, 2004), 44–45.
46. Michael R. Licona, "Can We Be Certain That Jesus Died on the Cross?," in *Evidence for God: 50 Arguments for Faith from the Bible, History, Philosophy, and Science*, ed. William A. Dembski and Michael R. Licona (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker, 2010), 165.
47. Licona, "Can We Be Certain," 167.
48. Habermas expands on this point: "His explicit statement here is important, due to the respect that scholars have for Paul's testimony. Further, his claim has been vindicated because there are many textual indications that the words that follow were not composed by him. For example, this list of appearances exhibits a parallel structure, as if it were an ancient creed. Moreover, to identify a few other characteristics, the Greek sentence structure, diction, and some of the words are not Paul's, judging from his other epistles. Most scholars who address the subject think that Paul received this material about AD 35 just three years after his conversion, when he made his first trip to Jerusalem. Paul explains that he visited Peter and James the brother of Jesus (see Gal. 1:18–19). In the immediate context both before and after, Paul is discussing the nature of the gospel (see Gal. 1:11–2:10). Additionally, Paul's choice of words in verse 18 shows that he was interviewing or questioning the two apostles in order to gain information." Gary Habermas, "The Resurrection Appearances of Jesus," in *Evidence for God: 50 Arguments for Faith from the Bible, History, Philosophy, and Science*, ed. William A. Dembski and Michael R. Licona (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker, 2010), 173–74.
49. Habermas, "The Resurrection Appearances of Jesus," 174–75.
50. See 1 Corinthians 15:9; Galatians 1:13–14; Philippians 3:4–7.
51. See 1 Corinthians 9:1; 15:8; Galatians 1:16.
52. Habermas and Licona, *The Case for the Resurrection of Jesus*, 65.
53. See Mark 3:21; 6:3–4; John 7:52.
54. See Acts 15:12–21; Galatians 1:19.
55. Habermas and Licona, *The Case for the Resurrection of Jesus*, 68.
56. Habermas and Licona, *The Case for the Resurrection of Jesus*, 70.
57. See Matthew 28:12–13; Justin Martyr, *Dialogue with Trypho*, 108; Tertullian, *De Spectaculis*, 30; Habermas and Licona, *The Case for the Resurrection of Jesus*, 71.
58. Habermas and Licona, *The Case for the Resurrection of Jesus*, 72–73.
59. William Lane Craig, *On Guard: Defending Your Faith with Reason and Precision* (Colorado Springs, CO: David C Cook, 2010), 228–29.
60. N. T. Wright, *The Resurrection of the Son of God: Christian Origins and the Question of God*, vol. 3 (Minneapolis: Fortress, 2003), 710.
61. Wright, *The Resurrection of the Son of God*, 710.
62. 1 Corinthians 15:6: "He appeared to more than five hundred brothers at one time, most of whom are still alive, though some have fallen asleep."
63. Mark 16:8: "They went out and fled from the tomb, for trembling and astonishment had seized them, and they said nothing to anyone, for they were afraid"; John 20:19: "On the evening of that day, the first day of the week, the doors being locked where the disciples were for fear of the Jews, Jesus came and stood among them and said to them, 'Peace be with you.'"
64. Luke 24:38: "He said to them, 'Why are you troubled, and why do doubts arise in your hearts?'"; John 20:25: "The other disciples told him, 'We have seen the Lord.' But he said to them, 'Unless I see in his hands the mark of the nails, and place my finger into the mark of the nails, and place my hand into his side, I will never believe.'"
65. Acts 4:21: "When they had further threatened them, they let them go, finding no way to punish them, because of the people, for all were praising God for what had happened"; Acts 5:18, "They arrested the apostles and put them in the public prison."
66. Michael R. Licona, "Were the Resurrection Appearances of Jesus Hallucinations?," in *Evidence for God: 50 Arguments for Faith from the Bible, History, Philosophy, and Science*, ed. William A. Dembski and Michael R. Licona (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker, 2010), 178.
67. Licona, "Were the Resurrection Appearances," 178.
68. Licona, "Were the Resurrection Appearances," 178.
69. Craig, *On Guard*, 241–42.
70. Wright, *The Resurrection of the Son of God*, 710.
71. Luke 8:26–29: "Then they sailed to the country of the Gerasenes, which is opposite Galilee. When Jesus had stepped out on land, there met him a man from the city who had demons. For a long time he had worn no clothes, and he had not lived in a house but among the tombs. When he saw Jesus, he cried out and fell down before him and said with a loud voice, 'What have you to do with me, Jesus, Son of the Most High God? I beg you, do not torment me.' For he had commanded the unclean spirit to come out of the man. (For many a time it had seized him. He was kept under guard and bound with chains and shackles, but he would break the bonds and be driven by the demon into the desert.)"
72. Luke 13:10–11: "He was teaching in one of the synagogues on the Sabbath. And behold, there was a woman who had had a disabling spirit for eighteen years. She was bent over and could not fully straighten herself."
73. Julian Huxley, *Evolution: The Modern Synthesis* (New York: Harper and Brothers, 1942), 457.
74. Charles Taylor, *A Secular Age* (Cambridge, MA: Belknap, 2007), 269.
75. Jay E. Adams, *Competent to Counsel: Introduction to Nouthetic Counseling* (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker, 1970), 28.
76. Adams, *Competent to Counsel*, 29.
77. Lawrence J. Crabb, *Basic Principles of Biblical Counseling: Meeting Counseling Needs through the Local Church* (Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 1975), 48–49.
78. Karl I. Payne, *Spiritual Warfare: Christians, Demonization, and Deliverance* (Washington, DC: WND Books, 2011), 34.
79. C. Fred Dickason, *Demon Possession and the Christian: A New Perspective* (Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 1987), 37.
80. The references to Satan as the prince of the demons is translated in Greek as *Beelzeboul*, which is a reference to Baal, with *zeboul* meaning "flies." So Beelzebub is "Lord of the flies." See Matthew 12:24, 27; Mark 3:22; Luke 11:15, 18ff. See F. F. Bruce, "Bal-Zebub, Beelzebul," in *New Bible Dictionary*, 3rd ed., ed. I. Howard Marshall, A. R. Millard, J. I. Packer, and D. J. Wiseman (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity, 1996), 108.
81. W. E. Vine, Merrill F. Unger, and William White, *Vine's Expository Dictionary of Biblical Words* (Nashville: Thomas Nelson, 1985), 12.
82. Robert T. Boyd, "Baal Worship," in *Boyd's Bible Handbook* (Eugene, OR: Harvest House, 1983), 106–14.
83. Ray Vander Laan, "Fertility Cults of Canaan," Follow the Rabbi, followtherabbi.com/guide/detail/fertility-cults-of-canaan.
84. Isaiah 65:4 condemns the worshippers of false gods—namely, Baal—"who sit in tombs, and spend the night in secret places; who eat pig's flesh, and broth of tainted meat is in their vessels."
85. The most thorough treatment of the exploits of the Canaanite god El and his family is probably Mark S. Smith, *The Ugaritic Baal Cycle* (Leiden, NL: E. J. Brill, 1994). For a popular treatment, see Paul T. Penley, *Reenacting the Way* (of Jesus) (Colorado Springs, CO: Re-enacting the Way, 2013), 120–31.
86. We know that this thought probably occurred to some of them because when Jesus asked his disciples who people thought he was, one of the views offered was that he was the reincarnation of Elijah (Matt. 16).
87. See Ray Vander Laan, "A Far Country—Decapolis," Follow the Rabbi, followtherabbi.com/guide/detail/a-far-country-decapolis. Vander Laan's insights are based on Bargil Pixner, *With Jesus through Galilee according to the Fifth Gospel* (Rosh Pina, Israel: Corazin Publishing, 1992). For a popular treatment, see Penley, *Reenacting the Way*, 129.
88. For more information, Vander Laan, "A Far Country—Decapolis."
89. Martin Luther, "A Mighty Fortress Is Our God," trans. Frederick H. Hedge, www.hymnsite.com/lyrics/umh110.sht
90. Romans 16:20: "The God of peace will soon crush Satan under your feet. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you."
91. Charles H. Kraft, *Christianity with Power: Your Worldview and Your Experience of the Supernatural* (Eugene, OR: Wipf and Stock, 1989), 28.
92. See, for example, Jeremy Roschelle, "Learning in Interactive Environments: Prior Knowledge and New Experience," Institute for Inquiry, www.exploratorium.edu/ifi/resources/museumeducation/priorknowledge.html.
93. C. S. Lewis, *The Magician's Nephew* (New York: HarperCollins, 1994), 134.
94. Payne, *Spiritual Warfare*, 115.
95. Payne, *Spiritual Warfare*, xxii.
96. C. S. Lewis, *The Screwtape Letters* (New York: HarperOne, 2009), 16.
97. *The Usual Suspects*, directed by Bryan Singer (Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, 1995).
98. James 4:7: "Submit yourselves therefore to God. Resist the devil, and he will flee from you."
99. Dickason, *Demon Possession and the Christian*, 37.
100. 1 Corinthians 6:20: "You were bought with a price. So glorify God in your body."
101. William Lane Craig, "Did Jesus Rise from the Dead?," in *Jesus Under Fire: Modern Scholarship Reinvents the Historical Jesus*, ed. Michael J. Wilkins and J. P. Moreland (Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 1995), 166.
102. 1 John 2:16: "All that is in the world—the desires of the flesh and the desires of the eyes and pride of life—is not from the Father but is from the world."
103. Payne, *Spiritual Warfare*, 89.
104. Curt Thompson, *Anatomy of the Soul: Surprising Connections between Neuroscience and Spiritual Practices That Can Transform Your Life and Relationships* (Carol Stream, IL: Tyndale, 2010), 53.
105. Thompson, *Anatomy of the Soul*, 83.
