<!-- page-297 -->
# Chapter 12: Isn't Christianity Anti-Science?

## 1. The Battle between Christianity and Science

In "Cosmos in Theological Scriptures"—a scholarly article published in a journal dealing with space, science, and law—Indian attorney Gurbachan Singh Sachdeva asserts the following:

<!-- page-298 -->

> Christian interpretations of the origin of the universe, as per the Christian Bible, are generally well known.... Christianity believes that the Earth is the stationary center of our solar system and everything else revolves around it, including the Sun. Man, the supreme earthly being, came to inhabit the Earth as the progeny of Adam, who was expelled from Heaven for his sin of having tasted the forbidden fruit that impelled him to commit the sin of fornication. In punishment, he was dropped onto the Earth to live in loneliness so that he could repent for his cardinal sin. Later, in compassion, God created Eve out of the rib of Adam to give him company and as consort. Cohabitation followed and the result has been mankind on Earth.<sup>1</sup>

Sachdeva has nearly every aspect of the biblical creation narrative wrong, but one wonders how many of his readers, in accepting the larger point of his article, also unthinkingly accept his account of Scripture.

That Sachdeva's account made it into a scholarly journal presumably concerned with accuracy may be a rather odd illustration of the tension between science and Christianity, but it serves to highlight a larger debate over whether science is supreme and Christianity is merely a quaint superstition. To many scientists, one cannot be both religious and intelligent at the same time. Famed biologist Edward O. Wilson puts it this way: "The human mind evolved to believe in the gods. It did not evolve to believe in biology.... The uncomfortable truth is that the two beliefs are not factually compatible. As a result those who hunger for both intellectual and religious truth will never acquire both in full measure."<sup>2</sup>

> **DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid):** a self-replicating, double strand of nucleic acid located in the nucleus of a cell; the storehouse for the genetic instructions used to build every protein within an organism.

Of course, there are scientists who dispute this "science versus religion" framing. Francis Collins, director of the National Institutes of Health and the scientist who headed up the Human Genome Project, which mapped the entire human deoxyribonucleic acid (**DNA**) sequence, said, "Science is not threatened by God; it is enhanced. God is most certainly not threatened by science; He made it all possible."<sup>3</sup>

So which point is closer to the truth? Are science and religion (specifically Christianity, in this case) compatible, or are they going to forever be at odds?

Some faith systems are incompatible with science, but Christianity is not one of them. The Bible describes a God who is orderly and knowable and who made a world that consists of knowable reality (Ps. 8:3–5).<sup>4</sup> Jesus Christ is presented as the creator of everything both visible and invisible (Col. 1:16).<sup>5</sup> As we will see, modern science was founded on these assumptions. Only in the past two centuries or so has science come to be seen as incompatible with and superior to Christianity.

It is possible that those who view Christianity and science as incompatible have observed something that somehow escaped the notice of everyone who has lived in the last two thousand years. But is it also possible that modern assumptions have somehow colored people's perceptions and caused them to miss a greater truth? To answer this question, we need to closely examine what science actually is, its history, the contributions of Christians to the

<!-- page-299 -->

field, the limits of science, and whether the supposed conflicts between the Bible's claims and the claims of science can be reasonably explained.

## 2. A Straightforward Way to Think about the Bible and Science

> **Science:** the process of using observable evidence to construct testable explanations and predictions for natural phenomena.

The National Academy of Sciences defines **science** as "the use of evidence to construct testable explanation and prediction of natural phenomena, as well as the knowledge generated through this process" and holds that "scientists gather information by observing the natural world and conducting experiments."<sup>6</sup> Science assumes that nature operates in a predictable, stable manner and that the results we obtain in any given case will yield similar results under similar conditions. This assumption about the orderliness and predictability of nature—indeed a great many of science's underlying assumptions—is based on principles that early scientists believed because they believed in the God of the Bible.

This is not to say that the Bible is a book of science. It's bigger than that. The Bible, as we saw in earlier chapters, presents an overarching story—a metanarrative about the world and everyone in it from the perspective of a sovereign God and his plan for the world.

Though the Bible is not a book of science, it is not against science either. The relationship of science to the Bible is similar to the relationship between photography and the study of history. Just as science helps clarify our observations of nature, photography enables accurate pictures to be made. Accuracy does help tell better stories, but photographs themselves are not the story, nor are they the only or best way of telling it. Just as it would be foolish to say that there was no history before there was photography, it is foolish to say that people's prescientific thoughts were ignorant and now irrelevant.

"But this is an unfair analogy," some might protest. "Science makes our observations more accurate, which enables us to make superior decisions to those made in more Christian times." This is a serious point and one worth examining. It is true that there are many examples of how people in more Christian times made bad or bizarre decisions. But people have done bad and bizarre things in the name of science, too. Physics and engineering made possible weapons that are far deadlier than those used in previous centuries. And sometimes scientists even distort the truth for their own purposes, as happened with Soviet scientist T. D. Lysenko, who "outlawed" dissent from his theory of genetics because he believed that contrary thought would pose a threat to Marxism and upset the Soviet leader Joseph Stalin.<sup>7</sup>

As we will see, the relationship between Christianity and science is not what people imagine. It certainly does not fit the "We're smarter than we used to be, so we need to reject Christianity" narrative. The truth is much more complex—and much more fascinating.

## 3. How Christianity Brought About Modern Science

Everyone has heard the story of Isaac Newton (1643–1727) sitting under an apple tree, thinking deep thoughts, when all of a sudden an apple fell on his head and inspired him to

<!-- page-300 -->

discover the law of gravity. The story is so popular that descendants of the purported tree have been replanted in significant locations, including at Trinity College at Cambridge University outside the window of the room where Newton lived and studied.

Unfortunately, what really happened hardly keeps our interest: Newton did report a falling apple, and he did muse about why the fall of apples is perpendicular, rather than sideways, to the ground, but it took two decades for Newton to work out his subsequent thoughts about planetary motion and propose the law of gravity in *The Principia*, a tome of more than 450 pages.

Clearly, though, stories have immense power. According to British social scientist Philip J. Sampson, people tend to remember and believe well-told stories, even if false,<sup>8</sup> which might explain why so many believe that it was scientists who bravely rejected church authority and exalted reason and thus set people free from superstitious ignorance. Christianity, by this narrative, is illicitly grasping for control in the face of scientific truth. Sampson traces this narrative back to Thomas Huxley, "Darwin's bulldog," who thought that religious beliefs threatened acceptance of Charles Darwin's theory.<sup>9</sup> But is this a battle of truth or a battle of stories *about* truth? Was Huxley stating things as they actually were or glossing over complexities in order to replace one set of stories with another? Huxley did seem to resent Christianity, even forming the Sunday Lecture Society as an alternative to church to promote learning free of what he considered to be religious dogma.

> People tend to remember and believe well-told stories, even if false, which might explain why so many believe that it was scientists who bravely rejected church authority and exalted reason and thus set people free from superstitious ignorance.

After Huxley, late nineteenth-century historians such as John W. Draper and Andrew D. White promoted science by writing derisively of Christianity. They invented and used stories to perpetuate the myths that supported scientific progress,<sup>10</sup> such as Christopher Columbus's conquering religious superstition about the earth being a flat disc with Jerusalem at the center by fearlessly sailing toward the earth's supposed edge. White gleefully repeated the story of Pope Callixtus III, horrified at the arrival of Halley's Comet, excommunicating it as an agent of the Devil. Neither account has any factual basis. All educated people at the time of Columbus knew the earth was round, and the story of the pope excommunicating a comet was made up.<sup>11</sup> Both stories have nonetheless been trumpeted as evidence of Christianity being anti-science.

Another example often enlisted to portray Christianity as anti-science is that of Galileo Galilei's (1564–1642) interrogation at the hands of the Catholic Church in 1633. Secularist philosopher and mathematician Bertrand Russell, for instance, said, "Galileo, as everyone knows, was condemned by the Inquisition.... He recanted, and promised never again to maintain that the earth rotates or revolves. The Inquisition was successful at putting an end to science in Italy ... and did considerable damage to the Church by its stupidity."<sup>12</sup>

Contrary to Russell's telling, Sampson quotes prominent Galileo scholars in labeling the "Galileo versus the Inquisitors" story a "simplistic myth." More accurately, he says, Galileo's interrogation resulted from "complex intrigues of politics and patronage" and "wounded pride" rather than a conflict over whether the earth revolves around the sun, or the sun around the earth.<sup>13</sup> Basically, what happened is this: Galileo's research confirmed some central aspects of

<!-- page-301 -->

Nicholas Copernicus's theory that the earth revolved around the sun rather than the other way around. Galileo sent his results to Pope Paul V, who responded warmly and offered to support the theory provisionally, pending further evidence. Rather than doing additional research to provide such evidence, though, Galileo picked fights with his fellow scientists, who he thought were questioning his brilliance by proving some aspects of his thesis wrong. He also quarreled with Vatican theologians by attempting to interpret the Bible in ways that Roman Catholic Church leaders found to be rebellious. At a time when the Protestant Reformation was in full swing, this was a definite no-no.

And still the church responded to Galileo in mild and restrained ways until he published a parable that included a character, Simplicio (simpleton), into whose mouth he put the words of the new pope, Urban VIII. Brought on trial for heresy, the church still tried to treat the now aging and sickly Galileo with kindness by providing a luxurious apartment at the Vatican and a personal valet during the trial. Mocking the Vatican court during his trial, Galileo was eventually sentenced to live out his days at a country house in Florence, cared for by his daughter.<sup>14</sup> Even Alfred North Whitehead, Russell's onetime coauthor, pointed out that contrary to tales of Galileo being imprisoned in a dank dungeon and threated with torture, he "suffered an honourable detention and a mild reproof, before dying peacefully in his bed."<sup>15</sup>

> When all the facts are known, the Galileo story is not one of science versus religion. Galileo himself didn't believe that religion and science were in conflict.

When all the facts are known, the Galileo story is not one of science versus religion. Galileo himself didn't believe that religion and science were in conflict. Rather, he wrote admiringly of God's design for the mind: "When I consider what marvelous things and how many of them men have understood, inquired into, and contrived, I recognize and understand stand only too clearly that the human mind is a work of God's, and one of the most excellent."<sup>16</sup>

The story of an age of ignorance in which religious superstition suppressed the development of science now appears to be a false history designed to make Christianity look villainous. As C. Warren Hollister, a distinguished medievalist, said, "Anyone who believes that the era that witnessed the building of Chartres Cathedral and the invention of parliament and the university was 'dark' must be ... deeply, deeply, ignorant."<sup>17</sup>

Although some may find the Christianity-as-villain-and-science-as-savior narrative compelling, the truth is actually more interesting. Science assumes an orderly universe. If the universe were disorderly or chaotic, we couldn't expect it to behave in a predictable, comprehensible, meaningful manner. For instance, we could not reasonably assume that Newton's apple would always fall down. Perhaps it would hit a pocket of chaos and fall up or travel sideways or aim directly for a neighbor's plate-glass window. But why should we assume that our universe is orderly and predictable? To distinguished scholar of science and religion John Hedley Brooke, early scientists assumed that "there were laws of nature only because there had been a Legislator."<sup>18</sup>

Indeed, a great deal of modern science was born out of Christian beliefs. Theologian Francis Schaeffer wrote, "Since the world had been created by a reasonable God, [scientists] were not surprised to find a correlation between themselves as observers and the thing observed—that is, between subject and object.... Without this foundation, modern Western science would not

<!-- page-302 -->

have been born."<sup>19</sup> Holmes Rolston III, distinguished professor of philosophy at Colorado State University, likewise explains,

> It was monotheism that launched the coming of physical science, for it premised an intelligible world, sacred but disenchanted, a world with blueprint, which was therefore open to the searches of the scientists. The great pioneers in physics—Newton, Galileo, Kepler, Copernicus—devoutly believed themselves called to find evidences of God in the physical world. Even Einstein, much later and in a different era, when puzzling over how space and time were made, used to ask himself how God would have arranged the matter. A universe of such beauty, an Earth given over to life and to culture—such phenomena imply a transcending power adequate to account for these productive workings in the world.<sup>20</sup>

American scholar Ian Barbour points out that the world's oldest scientific society, the Royal Society of London, "instructed its fellows to direct their studies 'to the glory of God and the benefits of the human race'" and notes that these early scientists "identified themselves with the Christian tradition in which they were nourished, and many of them seem to have experienced a personal response of reverence and awe toward the marvels they beheld."<sup>21</sup> He explains,

> Expressions of awed surprise and admiration of the skill of the Creator dot the pages of their writings. The sense of the grandeur and wisdom of God was evidently a very positive experience for many of them and not just an abstract intellectual formula or a concession to cultural respectability.<sup>22</sup>

> Philosopher and historian of science Stanley Jaki noted that the belief in creation and the Creator "formed the bedrock on which science rose."

Similarly, philosopher and historian of science Stanley Jaki noted that the belief in creation and the Creator "formed the bedrock on which science rose."<sup>23</sup> Jaki's perspective is especially noteworthy because, as a Catholic priest and influential philosopher, he was well-versed in both religion and science. Jaki maintained that

> the belief in a personal rational Creator ... as cultivated especially within a Christian matrix ... supported the view for which the world was an objective and orderly entity investigable by the mind because the mind too was an orderly and objective product of the same rational, that is, perfectly consistent Creator.<sup>24</sup>

Rolston, Barbour, and Jaki are by no means uneducated observers, and their conclusion is clear: science is possible because God was believed by early scientists to be as the Bible describes him: a God of reason and order. Christianity, then, was "the mother of modern science."<sup>25</sup> Skeptics may scoff, but today's scientific breakthroughs are possible because of tools forged in a faith-based belief system.

<!-- page-303 -->

So who were these early scientists so committed to a Christian view of the world? We've already mentioned Isaac Newton. Another was Robert Boyle (1627–1691), a founder of modern chemistry and the discoverer of Boyle's Law, which describes the relationship between the pressure and volume of a gas. Boyle wrote a book called *The Christian Virtuoso*, in which he described what it would take for a Christian to be an outstanding scientist, or, as he termed it, "experimental philosopher." His criteria included being without material ambition, truth focused, humble, honorable, devout, and in submission to the authority of nature and not of other men.<sup>26</sup> Boyle was well known for trying to live up to this code, and it is hard to imagine other scientists in Oxford and in the Royal Society being uninfluenced by his views. John Hedley Brooke thus observes of Boyle and his contemporaries,

> Robert Boyle and Isaac Newton saw the study of nature as a religious duty. A knowledge of God's power and wisdom could be inferred from the intelligence seemingly displayed in the designs of nature. Newton affirmed that the natural sciences had prospered only in monotheistic cultures.... He believed the universality of his laws was grounded in the omnipresence of a single divine Will.<sup>27</sup>

Boyle and Newton, however, were hardly the only self-proclaimed Christians who became revered scientists.

Another example, English philosopher Francis Bacon (1561–1626) is credited with establishing the scientific method as the ruling method for investigation. Committed to his craft and his faith, he used distinctly biblical language to describe the "idols" that could corrupt science, such as self-deception, prejudice, misuse of words, and false persuasion. Summarizing Bacon's view, Harvard historian of science Steven Shapin says, "We are human, all-too-human; we are fallen and fallible; and such is our fate."<sup>28</sup> Bacon's theology, rooted in the biblical idea that humans are subject to sin, was the basis of the careful, studious approach to discovery that he pioneered.

> **Age of Enlightenment:** an eighteenth-century intellectual movement that emphasized reason, science, and individualism over tradition and religious authority.

So what caused the breakup between science and Christianity? Apparently, as science moved into the eighteenth century, those promoting the Enlightenment came to believe that rationality and systematic thinking could cure humanity's fall into sin and restore virtue.<sup>29</sup> Faith in rationality began to replace faith in God. Science became a form of worship. Famous historian of science George Sarton admitted as much when he described science as "the very anchor of our philosophy, of our morality, of our faith."<sup>30</sup>

Today, we are still experiencing vibrations from the earthquake that we now know as the **Age of Enlightenment**. And some of those vibrations opened a rift between science and Christianity that seems to be widening to this day.

## 4. Are Faith and Science Locked in Mortal Combat?

David Berlinski is a mathematician and brilliant writer. Jewish by heritage and secular by conviction, he is nonetheless critical of those who pit faith against science. Both are necessary,

<!-- page-304 -->

he says, quoting Albert Einstein: "Science without religion is lame, religion without science is blind."<sup>31</sup>

Voices like Berlinski's, though, seem to be getting drowned out. Victor Stenger, a leading atheist who died in 2014, asserted, "Faith is belief in the absence of supportive evidence and even in the light of contrary evidence.... Science makes no such assumptions on faith."<sup>32</sup> He said, "Using the empirical method, science has eliminated smallpox, flown men to the moon, and discovered DNA.... Relying on faith, religion has brought us inquisitions, holy wars, and intolerance."<sup>33</sup> To Stenger it is clear that not only is there a battle between belief (represented by religion and philosophy) and knowledge (represented by science) but that science has won a clear victory. All that remains is for religious people to have the good sense to surrender.

In this chapter, we will suggest that the "science versus faith" battle Stenger outlined is much more nuanced than he seemed to believe, for two reasons.

**First, science is consistent with the Christian faith.** We must keep in mind that saying that science "has eliminated smallpox, flown men to the moon, and discovered DNA" is a kind of shorthand that makes science appear to be more powerful than it really is. In fact, "science" is not a force of nature but rather the result of the work of individuals who create breakthroughs by practicing the disciplines of repeatedly observing, measuring, and experimenting.<sup>34</sup> To do this, scientists must assume that the universe operates in observable, measurable, and repeatable ways—assumptions that are entirely consistent with the testimony of Scripture if not derived directly from a Christian worldview.

Still, many feel comfortable with near-worship of science. Physicist Stephen Hawking has crowed, "Scientists have become the bearers of the torch of discovery in our quest for knowledge."<sup>35</sup> But as Oxford mathematician John Lennox points out, Hawking's assertion is a philosophical statement, not a scientific one.<sup>36</sup> Scientists might be proud of their achievements, but most recognize the limits of their craft. A few—such as Stenger, Hawking, and Dawkins—seem to enjoy cutting loose with the occasional victory howl, but most just keep their heads down and continue their work.

> Christians should have no problem embracing scientific as well as philosophical, religious ways of knowing. After all, if one starts with a designer, a person expects to find design in the world.

Christians should have no problem embracing scientific as well as philosophical, religious ways of knowing. After all, if one starts with a designer, a person expects to find design in the world. This is why scholars such as Rodney Stark say it is precisely *because* of their religious convictions about design and order, not in spite of them, that the world's greatest scientists succeeded. Moreover, it was Christianity in particular (rather than Islam, New Age spirituality, or any of the atheistic humanisms) that was most responsible for this success.<sup>37</sup> Christians founded chemistry, paleontology, bacteriology, antiseptic surgery, genetics, thermodynamics, computer science, and many other fields.<sup>38</sup> If these breakthroughs come because of the faith of scientists rather than in spite of it—and strong evidence indicates that they do—then to pit faith against science is to misunderstand both faith and science.<sup>39</sup>

<!-- page-305 -->

**Second, naturalistic science is *based* on faith.** Physicist and bestselling author Paul Davies, a respected scientist who is not a Christian believer, makes an interesting claim: "science has its own faith-based belief system."<sup>40</sup> When Davies asked colleagues why the laws of physics are what they are, they replied, "That's not a scientific question" or "Nobody knows" or (and most revealing), "There is no reason they are what they are—they just are."<sup>41</sup> In short, science cannot account for the underlying truths that make it work. Scientists, Davies concludes, operate by faith. Until science comes up with a testable theory of the laws of the universe, he says, "Its claim to be free of faith is manifestly bogus."<sup>42</sup>

The next time someone implies that science is somehow "the good guy" while religion is "the bad guy," you might consider pressing forward with such questions as these:

- "What is science?"
- "If the universe is the product of chance, why is it reasonable to expect it to function as if it were designed, in a way that we can understand?"
- "What evidence do you have that only scientists who lack faith in design accomplish anything?"

At the very least, such questions can spark an interesting conversation. Perhaps they'll also leave the other person thinking more deeply about both faith and science.

So if science is a faith-based enterprise, based on faith in the orderliness of the world and operating by principles about the world for which it cannot account, what *are* those principles? We've addressed one already: how the lawfulness of the universe, without which scientific investigation is not possible, derives from a belief in a divine Creator. Yet the lawfulness of the universe is not the only scientific principle made uniquely possible by the Christian worldview. In their book *The Soul of Science*, Nancy Pearcey and Charles Thaxton list seven more:

1. Nature is valuable enough to study (as opposed to the ancient Greek belief that nature was transient and therefore relatively unimportant).

2. Nature is good but not god (as opposed to animistic religions that leave nature alone because it is the exclusive abode of the gods).

3. Nature is orderly (as opposed to religions that taught that the world is unpredictable because it is ruled by a pantheon of unruly and unpredictable gods).

4. Nature's laws can be precisely stated and understood (as opposed to ancient religions that taught that creation was too mysterious to be consistently known).

5. Humans can discover nature's order (as opposed to the ancient eastern belief that nature was not the product of a rational mind and therefore not subject to rational thinking).

<!-- page-306 -->

6. Detailed observation is possible and important (as opposed to Aristotle's thinking that if an object's purpose was understood, detailed observation of it is was unnecessary).

7. The universe is rationally intelligible because God is rationally intelligent (as opposed to philosophies that trust limited human intelligence as the only kind that really exists).<sup>43</sup>

These assumptions, consistent with biblical revelation, inspired some of the world's greatest scientists to develop the enterprise we call modern science.

Today, though, there are many disagreements among Christians themselves about what the Bible teaches regarding science. Let's take a look at these differences and see if we can find common ground.

## 5. The Consistency of the Bible's Claims with Scientific Observation

The Bible is not, as we have already discussed, primarily a book of science. Often people critique it as *anti*-science, though, because they lack an understanding of how to properly interpret Scripture's various genres. For example, we would not read David's plea in Psalm 17:8 for God to shelter him under his wings to mean that God has wings. In a poetic genre, under which Psalm 17 falls, the appropriate question is not "What does this say about God's literal, physical characteristics?" but rather "What truth does this poem speak about God's nature?"

Skeptics eager to disprove the Bible's purported scientific claims have often scoured its pages to find claims they know to be wrong. Most of them understand that writings of a poetic nature are not to be taken literally, but what about those passages that make literal historical claims? Those are fair game, are they not? This is why such critics usually zero in on the creation account in Genesis chapter 1. Using the tools of science, there are many things about Genesis 1 that, at first blush, don't make sense, such as how it was possible for there to have been light on earth before the sun was created. To say that "God could make it happen" is unsatisfying to these critics, and they are all too happy to use their findings to conclude that Christianity is, in fact, anti-science.

We shouldn't dismiss such concerns too quickly. A thoughtful reading of Genesis 1 clearly depicts a very literal-sounding creation story. It mentions the sun, moon, and stars along with birds in the air and fish in the sea. These physical objects and living creatures actually exist, of course. The use of the word *day* in the creation account to denote a cycle of evening and morning sounds like the sorts of days we actually experience. Adam and Eve are depicted as actual people whose descendants can be traced through the biblical narrative down through the generations, even to the birth of Jesus. Jesus himself talked about Adam and Eve as if they were specially created by God (Matt. 19:4; Mark 10:6–9).<sup>44</sup>

So do the days of creation describe literal history? Is the Genesis 1 narrative intended to communicate a sequence of events as they actually happened? If so, scientists say, Genesis 1 gets the facts wrong, and this casts suspicion on other biblical claims.

<!-- page-307 -->

There are four main ways Christians respond to the criticism of the claim that Genesis is factually inaccurate and unscientific.<sup>45</sup>

- **Young-age creationism:** Young-age creationists say that as recently as six thousand years ago, God created the universe in six twenty-four-hour days. Living organisms were created distinct and separate in much their present forms. Young-age creationists respond to their critics by saying that Christians ought to interpret science from the standpoint of the Bible rather than the Bible from the standpoint of science. If we do this, they say, we will see that scientists have misunderstood the data of the physical world. A handful of young-age creationists are currently developing and testing hypotheses about the young age of the earth that they believe will explain this data better than an old-earth hypothesis.

- **Progressive creationism:** Progressive creationists say God created basic kinds of living organisms separately (in something like their present forms) with the capacity to change and adapt to their circumstances over time (though within limits). Human beings were created separately by God at a much later time. This viewpoint holds that the days of creation were not literal twenty-four-hour days and accepts mainstream scientific beliefs about an "old" age of the earth and the universe, though it rejects Darwinian claims about the evolution of all life from the first self-replicating molecule.

- **Theistic evolution:** Theistic evolutionists generally grant that evolutionary theory is true but say God somehow initiated and oversaw the evolutionary process. Some believe that God sparked the first life and then worked through the natural process of evolution to bring about the diversity of life we see today. Others believe that the origin and evolution of life were completely natural events. In fact, some theistic evolutionists think God works only through natural causes. At some point, many theistic evolutionists believe, God gave human beings souls, setting them apart from other creatures.<sup>46</sup> Sometimes it's hard to distinguish the scientific views of theistic evolutionists from their atheistic counterparts except for their qualifier, "And by the way, God did it."

- **Intelligent design:** The fourth view has emerged in recent years to take insights about design and bring them into the scientific dialogue without commenting on the theological controversy among young-age creationism, progressive creationism, and theistic evolution. According to advocates of intelligent design (ID), from the cosmic architecture of the universe down to nanoscale molecular machines inside of cells, we find the marks of a designer. Many features of life are irreducibly complex—meaning they could not have evolved through chance-based, Darwinian evolutionary processes—and require an intelligent cause. Many scientists fail to see this, ID proponents believe, because they begin with a bias that says that only natural causes may be considered by science. They think the design hypothesis could check this naturalistic bias and yield greater scientific understanding. ID advocates take various positions on the age of the earth, though most recognize ID as consistent with an old-earth viewpoint and even with universal common ancestry.

<!-- page-308 -->

As you can see, young-age creationism, progressive creationism, and theistic evolution are quite different. They all employ insights from ID, but they make assumptions that contradict the assumptions of the others. They cannot all be equally true. Knowing this, organizations have developed around each viewpoint, hoping to recruit theologians, philosophers, and scientists to their way of thinking.

If you listen to debates among Christians on the origins issue, you might find yourself thinking, *Can't we all just get along?* Well, yes and no: "no" in the sense that some of the viewpoints, such as theistic evolution, take substantial theological liberties with the biblical text, leaving it difficult to see what about God's Word might actually be true (for example, denying that God specially created the first man and woman); "yes" in the sense that all these viewpoints affirm that God exists, that he is a creator outside of and transcendent over his creation, that creation is good, that God's work brings him glory, and that humans bear God's image and are stewards of creation. These are theological claims on which orthodox Christians agree.

If we step outside the controversy for a moment, we'll see that several of the Bible's claims are consistent with the scientific observations of our day: evidence of design in nature, something outside the universe bringing the universe into being, life arising from life and not from nonlife, intention and order in creation, humanity being at the apex of creation, and the limits to change in nature. Let's take a look at each of these in turn.

**There is evidence of design in nature.** Anglican clergyman William Paley's 1802 book *Natural Theology* was so widely respected that even Charles Darwin admitted, "I do not think I hardly ever admired a book more."<sup>47</sup> Paley offered what is now known as the **watchmaker argument:** a person chancing upon a watch in the wilderness could not conclude that the watch had simply always existed. Rather, the obvious design of the watch, including not only its internal makeup but also the fact that it exists for a purpose, would necessarily imply the existence of its designer and not the product of natural processes. Paley went on to substitute the universe for the watch and contend that a mechanism so obviously designed as the universe could only be the product of a grand designer.<sup>48</sup>

> **Watchmaker Argument:** an argument for God's existence that compares the design of a watch to the design found within the cosmos and concludes that the universe, like a watch, can be best explained by the existence of an intelligent designer.

As more details about the universe and living organisms are uncovered, the more we confirm the sort of design Paley saw with his limited scientific instruments. As Albert Einstein, who was certainly no creationist, said, "The harmony of natural law ... reveals an intelligence of such superiority that, compared with it, all the systematic thinking and acting of human beings is an utterly insignificant reflection."<sup>49</sup> More recently, physicist Paul Davies, who, as mentioned earlier, does not profess to be a Christian, said, "Every advance in fundamental physics seems to reveal yet another facet of order."<sup>50</sup>

Biochemist Michael Behe, in his book *Darwin's Black Box*, coined the phrase **irreducible complexity** to describe the way molecular "machines" (such as the bacterial flagellum) and biochemical processes (such as blood clotting) exhibit design. Irreducibly complex features are those that, if reduced to simpler or fewer parts, could not still perform their required

<!-- page-309 -->

function. Take a mousetrap, for example. All of the parts must exist and be assembled at once if you want to catch mice. One cannot start with the wooden base and then, after catching a few mice, add the bait and then a spring. According to Behe, a gradual step-by-step evolutionary process cannot explain a biological system in which all of the parts either work together in harmony or don't work at all.<sup>51</sup> Darwin taught that natural selection works on small improvements in function. But if a basic set of components must be in place before there even is function, then Darwinism has little to say about how complex organisms arose in the first place.

> **Irreducible Complexity:** a concept that considers the complexity of integrated systems such that if any part is removed, the system ceases to function, and that when applied to biology, challenges the notion that complex biological systems (such as the eye) could have gradually evolved through a series of intermediary steps.

Particularly among those scientists who have examined the tiny building blocks of life, there is growing suspicion of chance processes explaining the complexity they see. Australian biochemist Michael Denton explains,

> Although the tiniest bacterial cells are incredibly small, weighing less than 10-12 gms [grams], each is in effect a veritable micro-miniaturized factory containing thousands of exquisitely designed pieces of intricate molecular machinery, made up altogether of one hundred thousand million atoms, far more complicated than any machine built by man and absolutely without parallel in the non-living world.<sup>52</sup>

Even committed evolutionists recognize the unparalleled complexity of cellular systems. Former US National Academy of Sciences president Bruce Alberts wrote in the prominent journal *Cell*,

> The entire cell can be viewed as a factory that contains an elaborate network of interlocking assembly lines, each of which is composed of a set of large protein machines.... Why do we call the large protein assemblies that underlie cell function protein machines? Precisely because, like machines invented by humans to deal efficiently with the macroscopic world, these protein assemblies contain highly coordinated moving parts.<sup>53</sup>

Likewise, University of Chicago geneticist James Shapiro observes that "no human contrivance operates with either the degree of complexity, the precision, or the efficiency of living cells."<sup>54</sup>

Evidence for design has only grown since Paley wrote about it almost two centuries ago.<sup>55</sup> We now know that life is based upon an information-rich code in our DNA that provides building instructions for molecular machines inside our cells, which are full of coordinated, interacting parts that can operate at near 100 percent energy efficiency. But where in our experience do such things as language-based codes, computer-like programming commands, and irreducibly complex machines come from? They have only one known cause: intelligent beings.

<!-- page-310 -->

**Something outside the universe brought it into being.** One of the greatest discoveries of modern cosmology is that the universe began with an unimaginably powerful explosion from an infinitely small and densely compacted point of matter and energy. The evidence shows that the universe is finite in space and time, and this requires that the universe had a beginning. No causal chain we know of or can imagine is infinitely long, so there must have been a first cause. Theists call this uncaused cause God.

Science has something to say about this as well. In chapter 10, we briefly discussed the **second law of thermodynamics**, which posits that although the amount of energy in the universe remains constant, it does move from useful to less useful states, so there must have been a time when the energy "clock" began ticking.<sup>56</sup> The implication is that the universe must have had a beginning. Just like a grandfather clock that is winding down, there must have been a point at which it was originally wound up.

> **Second Law of Thermodynamics:** a scientific law that states that the amount of usable energy in a closed system will decrease over time.

As philosopher and former atheist Antony Flew observes, "The universe is something that begs an explanation," and therefore, "if the universe had a beginning, it became entirely sensible, almost inevitable, to ask what produced this beginning."<sup>57</sup> Not only that, but as Christian theologians and philosophers are quick to point out, whoever began the universe must be capable of possessing the variety of characteristics we see in the world today. For example, moral force, intelligence, love, justice, and so forth are immaterial concepts that could not have plausibly arisen from material conditions alone.

> **Mutation:** a change in the genetic makeup of an organism.

> **Natural Selection (aka Survival of the Fittest):** the process by which organisms better adapted for their environment tend to survive longer, reproduce, and pass along more favorable biological traits.

> **Spontaneous Generation:** the belief that nonliving matter produced living matter through purely natural processes.

**Life does not come from nonlife.** Naturalists believe that nothing exists except that which has a natural origin. Materialists believe in only the world of matter. Both naturalists and materialists share the belief that somewhere, somehow, at some time, life arose from nonlife and that it managed to survive and increase in complexity and organization through mechanisms such as **mutation** and **natural selection**. These resulted in the variety of life we see today, including human beings.

But how did this process begin? Life has never been observed to arise from nonlife. Even laboratory experiments under carefully controlled conditions have produced nothing more than a small handful of the dozens of chemical building blocks essential for life. Unless something alive and outside the universe brought life into existence, naturalists and materialists are stuck with only one option: at some point, life must have arisen from nonlife, a notion called **spontaneous generation**.

The authors of one of today's most popular biology textbooks admit that Francesco Redi and Louis Pasteur's

<!-- page-311 -->

mid-nineteenth-century experiments unequivocally disproved spontaneous generation and says that "those who had believed in the spontaneous generation of microorganisms gave up their fight."<sup>58</sup> Four pages later, however, this same text suggests that research by Soviet biochemist Alexander Oparin and others makes it "possible" to "believe" (note the faith-based language) that life can arise from nonlife.<sup>59</sup> Steven Garber's *Biology: A Self-Teaching Guide*, possibly the most popular biology text available (with more than two million copies sold), uses the same arguments.<sup>60</sup>

Although modern evolutionary scientists would no longer endorse "spontaneous generation" in the way it was upheld in centuries past, they still believe in a version of Oparin's hypothesis, claiming that life arose from inanimate matter via unguided chemical reactions on the early earth some three to four billion years ago. According to this view, there were many steps involved in the origin of life, but the very first was probably the production of a **primordial soup**—a water-based sea of simple organic molecules—out of which life arose. While the existence of this "soup" has been accepted as unquestioned fact for decades, even this first seemingly simple step in most origin-of-life theories faces numerous scientific difficulties.

> **Primordial Soup:** a theory that proposes that life arose from a water-based sea of simple, organic molecules.

> **Miller-Urey Experiment:** a 1952 experiment conducted by Stanley Miller and Harold Urey that produced amino acids through the combination of electricity and gases thought to be present in Earth's atmosphere around three to four billions year ago.

In 1953, a graduate student at the University of Chicago named Stanley Miller, along with his faculty adviser Harold Urey, performed experiments hoping to produce the building blocks of life under natural conditions on the early earth.<sup>61</sup> The **Miller-Urey experiments** intended to simulate lightning striking the gases in the early Earth's atmosphere. After running the experiments and letting the chemical products sit for a period of time, Miller discovered that amino acids—the building blocks of proteins—had been produced.

For decades, these experiments have been hailed as a demonstration that the "building blocks" of life could have arisen under natural, realistic earthlike conditions,<sup>62</sup> corroborating the "primordial soup" hypothesis. However, it has also been known for decades that the earth's early atmosphere was fundamentally different from the gases used by Miller and Urey. The atmosphere used in the Miller-Urey experiments was primarily composed of reducing gases, such as methane, ammonia, and high levels of hydrogen. (Reducing gases are those which tend to donate electrons during chemical reactions.) Geochemists now believe that the atmosphere of the early earth did not contain appreciable amounts of these components and lacked the "reducing atmosphere" used in Miller and Urey's experiments.<sup>63</sup> An article in the journal *Science* put it bluntly: "The early atmosphere looked nothing like the Miller-Urey situation."<sup>64</sup> Consistent with this, geological studies have not uncovered evidence that a primordial soup once existed.<sup>65</sup>

Because of these difficulties, some leading theorists have abandoned the Miller-Urey experiment and the "primordial soup" theory it is claimed to support. In 2010, University College of London biochemist Nick Lane stated the primordial soup theory "doesn't hold

<!-- page-312 -->

water" and is "past its expiration date."<sup>66</sup> Instead, he proposes that life arose in undersea hydrothermal vents. But this isn't a clear-cut solution either. Assume for a moment that there was some way to produce simple organic molecules in a "primordial soup" or that these molecules arose near some hydrothermal vent. Either way, origin-of-life theorists must then explain how simple organic molecules (monomers) linked up to form long chains (polymers) such as proteins (or ribonucleic acid [RNA]).

Chemically speaking, however, the last place you'd want to link amino acids into chains would be a vast water-based environment like the "primordial soup" or underwater near some hydrothermal vent. As the National Academy of Sciences acknowledges, "Two amino acids do not spontaneously join in water. Rather, the opposite reaction is thermodynamically favored."<sup>67</sup> In other words, water breaks protein chains back down into amino acids (or other constituents), making it very difficult to produce proteins (or other polymers) in the primordial soup. Materialists lack good explanations for these first, simple steps necessary to the origin of life. Chemical evolution is literally dead in the water.

But even if a primordial sea filled with life's building blocks did exist on the early earth, and even if it did somehow form proteins and other complex organic molecules, and even if more and more complex molecules formed until some began to self-replicate, and even if natural selection favored those that were better able to make copies, how would these molecules evolve into complex machinery—such as that used in today's genetic code—to survive and reproduce? Theorists are nowhere near an explanation.

> **RNA World Hypothesis:** a theory that proposes that early life was based on RNA instead of DNA and protein.

The most prominent option for the origin of the first life is called the ribonucleic acid world hypothesis (**RNA world hypothesis**), in which some theorists postulate that the first life might have used RNA instead of DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) and proteins. But there are many problems with this hypothesis.

First, the first RNA molecules would have to arise by unguided, nonbiological chemical processes. But RNA won't assemble without the help of a skilled laboratory chemist intelligently guiding the process. New York University chemist Robert Shapiro critiqued the efforts of those who tried to make RNA in the lab, stating, "The flaw is in the logic—that this experimental control by researchers in a modern laboratory could have been available on the early Earth."<sup>68</sup> Second, although RNA has been shown to perform many roles in the cell, there is no evidence that it could perform all the necessary cellular functions currently carried out by proteins.<sup>69</sup> Third, the RNA world hypothesis does not explain the origin of genetic information.

RNA world advocates suggest that if the first self-replicating life was based upon RNA, it would have required a molecule between two hundred and three hundred nucleotides in length.<sup>70</sup> However, there are no known chemical or physical laws that dictate the order of those nucleotides.<sup>71</sup> To explain the ordering of nucleotides in the first self-replicating RNA molecule, materialists must rely on sheer chance. But the odds of specifying, say, 250 nucleotides in an RNA molecule by chance is about 1 in 10150—10 with 150 zeros. This is well below the universal probability boundary, below which events are not remotely possible to occur within the history of the universe.<sup>72</sup> Robert Shapiro puts the problem this way: "The sudden appearance of a large self-copying molecule such as RNA was exceedingly improbable....

<!-- page-313 -->

[The probability] is so vanishingly small that its happening even once anywhere in the visible universe would count as a piece of exceptional good luck."<sup>73</sup>

Fourth—and most fundamentally—the RNA world hypothesis does not explain the origin of the genetic code itself. In order to evolve into the DNA/protein-based life that exists today, the RNA world would need to evolve the ability to convert genetic information into proteins. However, this process of transcription and translation requires a large suite of proteins and molecular machines, which themselves are encoded by genetic information. This poses a chicken-and-egg problem, where essential enzymes and molecular machines are needed to perform the very task that constructs them.

To appreciate this problem, consider the origin of the first DVD and DVD player. DVDs are rich in information, but without the machinery of a DVD player to read the disk, process its information, and convert it into a picture and sound, the disk would be useless. But what if the instructions for building the first DVD player were found encoded on only a DVD? You could never play the DVD to learn how to build a DVD player. So how did the first disk and DVD player system arise? The answer is obvious: a goal-directed, intelligent process created both the player and the disk at the same time.

Life faces a similar conundrum. In living cells, information-carrying molecules (e.g., DNA or RNA) are like the DVD, and the cellular machinery that reads that information and converts it into proteins are like the DVD player. Just like the DVD analogy, genetic information can never be converted into proteins without the proper machinery. Yet in cells, the machines required for processing the genetic information in RNA or DNA are themselves encoded by those same genetic molecules. The machines perform and direct the very task that builds them. This system cannot exist unless both the genetic information and transcription/translation machinery are present at the same time and both speak the same language. Some sort of intelligence was required to provide the foresight needed to produce this complex system all at once.

Despite decades of work, origin-of-life theorists are still at a loss to explain how life arose. In 2007, Harvard chemist George Whitesides was given the Priestley Medal, the highest award of the American Chemical Society. During his acceptance speech, he offered this stark analysis: "The Origin of Life. This problem is one of the big ones in science. It begins to place life, and us, in the universe. Most chemists believe, as do I, that life emerged spontaneously from mixtures of molecules in the prebiotic Earth. How? I have no idea."<sup>74</sup>

Dr. Whitesides is welcome to believe that the chemical origin of life occurred through unguided mechanisms, but we should not pretend his belief is anything but faith based. The evidence, in contrast, suggests that a goal-directed scientific explanation such as intelligent design is necessary to produce the information and complexity we see in life.

> **Panspermia:** the belief that life exists throughout the universe and has been dispersed by interstellar bodies such as asteroids, meteoroids, and comets.

Because of the lack of evidence for the chemical origin of life, some biology texts compensate with a short section on **panspermia**, the idea that life arrived from outer space. This idea has attracted a few prominent supporters, including molecular biologist Francis Crick, who co-won a Nobel Prize for discovering the

<!-- page-314 -->

structure of DNA. He explains why he gave up on the origin of life on earth: "An honest man, armed with all the knowledge available to us now, could only state that in some sense, the origin of life appears at the moment to be almost a miracle, so many are the conditions which would have had to have been satisfied to get it going."<sup>75</sup>

Crick's panspermia hypothesis, of course, only shifts the problem a few thousand light years away. Now the question becomes, how did life begin in outer space? It is odd for scientists to place their faith in something they cannot observe, measure, or repeat, like that life mysteriously arose from an extraterrestrial source that would have had to have been spontaneously generated from inanimate matter. Even stranger still is that many of these scientists are quite critical of Christians for being "unscientific."

**There is intention and order in creation.** The move from design to designer is called the **design argument** because things may *appear* to human observers to have been designed but may actually be without intention and order.<sup>76</sup> This is why deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) is such a fascinating subject of study. Chemist Charles Thaxton believes DNA is the most powerful indicator of intelligent design: "Is there any basis in experience for an intelligent cause for the origin of life? Yes! It is the analogy between the base sequences in DNA and alphabetical letter sequences in a book.... There is a structural identity between the DNA code and a written language."<sup>77</sup> That is, we can assume that DNA is the product of intelligence because it is analogous to human languages, which are without exception products of intelligent minds.

> **Design Argument (aka Teleological Argument):** an argument for God's existence that begins with the premise that design requires an intelligent designer and ends with the conclusion that God is the best explanation for the observable design within the universe.

When Francis Crick and James Watson discovered the structure of DNA, they trumpeted it as a condemnation of the "god hypothesis" and a debunking of religious myths. More recent research in genetics, though, indicates the presence of intention and order. The scientist who led the process to map the human genome, Francis Collins, says, "DNA can be thought of metaphorically as the language of God."<sup>78</sup> This is an astounding thing to have been said by someone who led the effort to solve the mysteries of DNA.

In fact, DNA research is one factor that led Antony Flew, the legendary British philosopher, to renounce atheism.<sup>79</sup> Flew writes, "The most impressive arguments for God's existence are those that are supported by recent scientific discoveries." He came to this conclusion because "the findings of more than fifty years of DNA research have provided materials for a new and enormously powerful argument to design."<sup>80</sup>

> **Anthropic Principle:** the theory that the universe contains all the necessary properties that make the existence of intelligent life inevitable.

**Humanity is at the apex of creation, both its final act and its caretaker.** If you've ever taken time to look at the stars and consider the vastness of the universe, you may have found yourself thinking, *How is it possible for life on this earth to be significant when the universe is so big?* This is the very question raised by King David in a poem we now know as Psalm 8:

<!-- page-315 -->

> When I look at your heavens, the work of your fingers, the moon and the stars, which you have set in place, what is man that you are mindful of him, and the son of man that you care for him? (vv. 3–4)

In reflection on this question, some scientists find themselves compelled by the **anthropic principle** (*anthro* means "pertaining to man"). Physicists John Barrow and Frank Tipler wrote about this argument in a book titled *The Anthropic Cosmological Principle*.<sup>81</sup> In one of its forms, the anthropic principle says we can observe the universe only because it exists in a way that allows us as observers to exist. In other words, the universe must have properties that make the existence of intelligent life inevitable.

Robert Jastrow—a highly regarded astronomer, physicist, and cosmologist—says, "The anthropic principle is the most interesting development next to the proof of the creation, and it is even more interesting because it seems to say that science itself has proven, as a hard fact, that this universe was made, was designed, for man to live in. It is a very theistic result."<sup>82</sup> Likewise, Nobel Prize–winning physicist Charles Townes explains, "Intelligent design, as one sees it from a scientific point of view, seems to be quite real. This is a very special universe: it's remarkable that it came out just this way. If the laws of physics weren't just the way they are, we couldn't be here at all. The sun couldn't be there, the laws of gravity and nuclear laws and magnetic theory, quantum mechanics, and so on have to be just the way they are for us to be here."<sup>83</sup>

**There are limits to change in nature.** Evolutionists who believe that all life arose from nothing beginning with spontaneous generation believe that mechanisms such as mutation and natural selection can explain all the variety of life we see today. Obviously, for this to be true, species must have been able to evolve into entirely different and more complex species over time. Mutation and natural selection can, according to evolutionists who take their theory all the way back to the origin of life, explain the production of and all the change in a vast array of structures—even a human eye—given enough time.

> **Microevolution:** the belief that small, adaptive changes are capable of producing variations within the gene pool of a species.

> **Macroevolution:** the belief that small, adaptive changes are capable of accumulating over time to produce entirely new species.

The biblical account suggests a subtler approach. Genesis claims that God created creatures according to their "kind," which implies groupings of animals. As we can observe through experimentation, many changes are possible within these groupings, but there seems to be a barrier beyond which they can no longer produce change in succeeding generations. This is the difference between **microevolution** (small changes within a species) and **macroevolution** (changes that lead to new species).

If a species can evolve only so far before it hits a barrier and is forced to remain the same species, then the idea of all species arising from one organism is problematic. Science simply has not been able to demonstrate that these barriers

<!-- page-316 -->

to change can be transcended. Zoologist Pierre-Paul Grassé, after studying mutations in bacteria and viruses, concluded, "What is the use of their unceasing mutations if they do not change? In sum, the mutations of bacteria and viruses are merely hereditary fluctuations around a median position; a swing to the right, a swing to the left, but no final evolutionary effect."<sup>84</sup> Similarly, US National Academy of Sciences member biologist Lynn Margulis maintained that "new mutations don't create new species; they create offspring that are impaired."<sup>85</sup> Her explanation:

> Mutations, in summary, tend to induce sickness, death, or deficiencies. No evidence in the vast literature of heredity changes shows unambiguous evidence that random mutation itself, even with geographical isolation of populations, leads to speciation [new species].<sup>86</sup>

> **Tree of Life:** a metaphor used to illustrate the belief that all of life originated from a common ancestor and gradually branched out into the wide variety of species seen within the fossil record.

> **Universal Common Ancestry:** the belief that all life originated from a common, single-celled organism.

In recent years, other core tenets of Darwinian theory, such as the **tree of life** supposition that all of life had a common ancestor, have also come under attack. A 2012 paper in *Annual Review of Genetics* challenged **universal common ancestry**, instead suggesting that "life might indeed have multiple origins."<sup>87</sup> Likewise, in a 2009 article in *New Scientist* titled "Why Darwin Was Wrong about the Tree of Life," Graham Lawton wrote, "Many biologists now argue that the tree concept is obsolete and needs to be discarded." The article quoted scientists saying such things as "We have no evidence at all that the tree of life is a reality" or "We've just annihilated the tree of life."<sup>88</sup>

The fact that change in nature seems limited to *within* species does not prove that the biblical idea of kind is a valid scientific concept, of course, but it does provide affirmation and make the biblical account seem less unscientific than many naturalists and materialists have assumed.

Although those determined to reject any supernatural explanation of the world may remain unconvinced, the biblical account is closer to what we actually observe than is philosophical naturalism, which says that only nature exists and therefore everything came from nature. For the believer wondering whether he or she is obligated to reject the biblical account because of scientific advances, this kind of evidence helps restore balance and perspective.

By restoring balance and perspective, we mean that it is more reasonable to focus on these larger issues when considering the relationship between science and the Bible than on minor issues, such as whether the ancient Hebrew understanding of what it means for a rabbit to "chew its cud" is the same as our understanding of what rabbits do when they move their mouths in a way that looks like a cow when chewing its cud.<sup>89</sup>

For a moment, let's return to the idea of theistic evolution, the belief that evolution *can* explain the variety of life on the planet today but that God somehow guided the process. Is it the reasonable compromise position it appears to be on the surface?

## 6. Problems with Theistic Evolution

<!-- page-317 -->

Students who learn about evolution these days are usually taught that life evolved from inorganic chemicals to the human race within a period of some 3.5 billion years. Because this is stated as science-based fact, Christians who believe in a creator are made to feel ignorant, backward, and unintelligent. They shouldn't feel this way. Rather, they should understand that when the theory of evolution moves beyond science and into the realm of philosophy, it becomes nothing more than a story that materialists and naturalists tell one another to affirm their rejection of the supernatural.

The story of materialism and naturalism appears true to people because it enlists what biologist Jonathan Wells calls "icons" that are used to make it seem true. These icons include pictures of peppered moths and finches, drawings of horse fossils of various sizes, Ernst Haeckel's inaccurate drawings that make the embryos of vertebrate species appear more similar than they actually are, and drawings of the progression from primate to human. In his book *Icons of Evolution*, Wells provides compelling evidence that these icons lack scientific rigor and are, in fact, misleading.<sup>90</sup>

Critics argue that Wells is asking too much of these icons and that he has nothing to replace them with.<sup>91</sup> Such critics miss the point. If the evidence supporting the evolutionary story is flawed, then these icons are leading people to believe a story that simply has not been proved true.

Christians suspect there is intelligence behind the universe, but they aren't the only ones. Paul Davies rejects the idea that everything in existence came about by chance: "I cannot believe that our existence in this universe is a mere quirk of fate, an accident of history, an incidental blip in the great cosmic drama. Our involvement is too intimate.... We are truly meant to be here."<sup>92</sup> Similarly, atheist cosmologist Fred Hoyle states, "A common sense interpretation of the data suggests that a superintellect has monkeyed with physics, as well as with chemistry and biology."<sup>93</sup> Christians who study the Bible find such comments affirming. The idea of a living God who created all things and who maintains them by his immense nature and character makes a lot of sense in light of comments such as these.

In spite of this, many Christian theologians and philosophers—the "theistic evolutionists"—have felt the need to reconcile their faith with evolution by proposing that God set up the universe but then somehow allowed inanimate matter to naturally evolve into human beings. It is a controversial view among atheists and theists alike. Is it enough to say that God is behind evolution, and does that even make sense with the way we understand evolution to work, as an unguided process?

This is particularly the case with the seeming contradiction between the evolutionary account that humans evolved through purposeless, chance-based processes and the biblical account that Adam and Eve were specially created. Many biblical authors treated Adam and Eve as if they were historical people, not mere allegories to help explain our earliest human ancestors. Jesus did too. In Mark 10:6, Jesus declared, "At the beginning of creation God 'made them male and female.'" Throughout the Bible, Adam is presented as a man who actually existed and whose sin brought condemnation and corruption upon all mankind, atoned for by Christ's death and resurrection (Rom. 5:12–19).

<!-- page-318 -->

Denying Adam and Eve's existence creates a number of serious theological problems. Theistic evolution encourages us to drop that egg, but once we do, it is hard to put it together again. This is a difficult question for many believers, and it is one that is very much at the heart of the debate on Darwinism undermines key Christian doctrines, one might wonder why so many Christians are rushing to embrace an evolutionary viewpoint.

There is perhaps common ground. In spite of very real and very serious differences, all of the various theistic perspectives on how creation took place can at least agree that humans are morally culpable creatures in a broken but privileged relationship with their Creator.

## 7. Conclusion

In the end, when people say that Christianity is anti-science, they show they understand neither Christianity nor science. Finding himself in the midst of a debate over the mechanisms of evolution, atheist and evolutionist Paul Lemoine wrote, "Evolution is a kind of dogma which the priests no longer believe, but which they maintain for their people."<sup>95</sup> In other words, scientists are just as prone as anyone else to convincing themselves with wrong stories told repeatedly.

Earlier in this volume, we learned that what makes faith valid is not that we have it but that the object of our belief is actually worthy of belief. As we've examined the supposed conflict between faith and science, we can see that the battle is not at all what it first seems.

Faith has its reasons, as authors Kenneth Boa and Robert Bowman say.<sup>96</sup> Science as a way of knowing can help inform biblical faith, and a biblical faith can help scientists be better at what they do. As C. S. Lewis puts it, "In science we have been reading only the notes to a poem; in Christianity we find the poem itself."<sup>97</sup>

Still, many critics of Christianity are not impressed. They believe that arguments about the Bible's truth are just word games. No religion is more or less true than any other, and it is intolerant to suggest otherwise. How to respond is the subject we'll tackle in chapter 13.

## Endnotes

1. Gurbachan Singh Sachdeva, "Cosmos in Theological Scriptures," *Astropolitics* 10 (2012): 269.
2. Edward O. Wilson, *Consilience: The Unity of Knowledge* (New York: Vintage, 1999), 286.
3. Francis Collins, *The Language of God: A Scientist Presents Evidence for Belief* (New York: Free Press, 2006), 233.
4. Psalm 8:3–5: "When I look at your heavens, the work of your fingers, the moon and the stars, which you have set in place, what is man that you are mindful of him, and the son of man that you care for him? Yet you have made him a little lower than the heavenly beings and crowned him with glory and honor."
5. Colossians 1:16: "By him all things were created, in heaven and on earth, visible and invisible, whether thrones or dominions or rulers or authorities—all things were created through him and for him."
6. National Academy of Sciences, *Science, Evolution, and Creationism* (Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2008), 10.
7. If you're interested, here's a more detailed account of how the Lysenko affair came about: Marxists long believed that communism was to society what evolution was to nature, a way of removing God from the equation of what happened in the past and bolstering a faith in future perfection (which they believed to be a communist society). Unfortunately, the mechanisms of evolution are terribly slow at producing change in nature, and their ultimate outcome is unpredictable by definition: they can move backward as well as forward. T. D. Lysenko, the leading Soviet biologist from the early 1930s into the 1950s and president of the Academy of Sciences, decided to customize evolutionary theory so it would better fit the Marxist view. Lysenko's ideas immediately ran up against the work of Gregor Mendel, the father of genetics, who demonstrated through his work with pea plants that living things reproduce by passing on inherited characteristics to their offspring (implying that change in nature would be very slow). Marxists found this unsatisfactory. Consequently, Lysenko resolved the issue by political dictate. He declared, "It is time to eliminate Mendelism in all its varieties from all courses and textbooks." Textbooks were changed. Soviet biologists who disagreed with him either repented or met untimely ends. The new party line: "Any little particle, figuratively speaking, any granule, any droplet of a living body, once it is alive, necessarily possesses the property of heredity." Lysenko's notions about heredity eventually led him to embrace Lamarckism, a theory that states that characteristics acquired during an organism's lifetime can be passed from one generation to the next as inheritable changes. Although Lamarckism has seen a very limited resurgence in recent years (see R. Bonduriansky, "Rethinking Heredity, Again," *Trends in Ecology and Evolution* 27, no. 6 [June 2012]: 330–36), most of its claims are viewed by scientists as utterly impossible. If a person "acquires" an amputated arm, will his offspring be born without an arm? If he works hard to develop musical ability, will his offspring be more musical? Probably Lysenko was "encouraged" to embrace Lamarckism because the Soviet leader Joseph Stalin had once done so, and no one could oppose Stalin and survive. But based on Lysenko's confidence, other Soviet biologists came in line with it as well. After Stalin died, the truth had to be admitted. In the end, it was a conflict of rival faiths: science versus Marxism. Marxists went to war against legitimate science and ended up looking silly in the eyes of the world. For more information, see David Joravsky, *The Lysenko Affair* (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1970), 210.
8. For a fuller explanation of how this is so, see "Introduction," in Philip J. Sampson, *6 Modern Myths about Christianity and Western Civilization* (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity, 2001), 7–26.
9. Sampson, *6 Modern Myths*, 20.
10. John W. Draper's book was published in 1890 under the title *History of the Conflict between Religion and Science*. Andrew D. White's *A History of the Warfare of Science with Theology in Christendom* was published in 1896.
11. The story of how this happened is complicated. Basically, an unreliable historian named Bartolomeo Platina mentioned something about the pope asking for prayers against a portending invasion by the Turks. Later, a scientist named Pierre-Simon Laplace embellished the story by saying the pope "conjured" against the comet. François Arago, in his pamphlet on comets, embellished even further by saying the pope "excommunicated" the comet. None of the papal documents of that time mentions anything about a comet factoring into concern over war with the Turks, so the entire story is now accepted as pure fiction by historians. A thorough explanation may be found in one of many Catholic encyclopedias, such as John Stein, "Bartolomeo Platina," *The Catholic Encyclopedia*, vol. 12 (New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1911).
12. Bertrand Russell, *The History of Western Philosophy* (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1967), 534.
13. Sampson, *6 Modern Myths*, 39.
14. For a brief and lively retelling of what actually happened to Galileo, see Joe Carter, "The Myth of Galileo: A Story with a (Mostly) Valuable Lesson for Today," *First Things*, September 8, 2011, www.firstthings.com/blogs/firstthoughts/2011/09/the-myth-of-galileo-a-story-with-a-mostly-valuable-lesson-for-today.
15. Sampson, *6 Modern Myths*, 38.
16. Galileo Galilei, *Dialogue concerning the Two Chief World Systems*, trans. Stillman Drake (New York: The University of California Press, 2001), 119–20, www.math.dartmouth.edu/~matc/Readers/renaissance.astro/7.1.DialogueFirstDay.html.
17. Quoted in Rodney Stark, *The Triumph of Christianity: How the Jesus Movement Became the World's Largest Religion* (New York: HarperCollins, 2011), 250.
18. John Hedley Brooke, "Science and Theology in the Enlightenment," in *Religion and Science: History, Method, Dialogue*, ed. W. Mark Richardson and Wesley J. Wildman (Oxford, UK: Routledge, 1996), 9.
19. Francis A. Schaeffer, *How Should We Then Live? Rise and Decline of Western Thought and Culture* (Old Tappan, NJ: Revell, 1976), 134.
20. Holmes Rolston III, *Science and Religion: A Critical Survey* (San Diego: Harcourt Brace, 1987), 39.
21. Ian G. Barbour, *Religion and Science: Historical and Contemporary Issues* (San Francisco: HarperSanFrancisco, 1997), 19–20.
22. Barbour, *Religion and Science*, 19–20.
23. Stanley L. Jaki, *The Road of Science and the Ways to God* (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1978).
24. Jaki, *The Road of Science*, 242. We also recommend Norman L. Geisler and J. Kerby Anderson, *Origin Science: A Proposal for the Creation-Evolution Controversy* (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker, 1987), and J. P. Moreland, *Christianity and the Nature of Science* (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker, 1989).
25. Jaki, *The Road of Science*, 242; Geisler and Anderson's *Origin Science* contains a chapter titled "The Supernatural Roots of Modern Science." Many non-Christians, such as highly regarded scientists Alfred North Whitehead and J. Robert Oppenheimer, defend this view as well. Stark's *For the Glory of God* offers a great summary of the Christian roots of modern science for those who wish to know more.
26. Steven Shapin, *Never Pure: Historical Studies of Science as If It Was Produced by People with Bodies, Situated in Time, Space, Culture, and Society, and Struggling for Credibility and Authority* (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins, 2010), 197–99.
27. Brooke, "Science and Theology in the Enlightenment," 8.
28. Shapin, *Never Pure*, 48.
29. Shapin, *Never Pure*, 48–50.
30. Shapin, *Never Pure*, 4.
31. David Berlinski, *The Devil's Delusion: Atheism and Its Scientific Pretensions* (New York: Basic Books, 2009), 4.
32. Victor Stenger, *God and the Folly of Faith: The Incompatibility of Science and Religion* (Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2012), 25.
33. Stenger, *God and the Folly of Faith*, 25.
34. John Lennox, *God and Stephen Hawking: Whose Design Is It Anyway?* (Oxford, UK: Lion Hudson, 2011), 18.
35. John Lennox, *God and Stephen Hawking*, 5.
36. John Lennox states, "Apart from the unwarranted hubris of this dismissal of philosophy ... it constitutes rather disturbing evidence that at least one scientist, Hawking himself, has not even kept up with philosophy sufficiently to realize that he himself is engaging in it throughout his book." In *God and Stephen Hawking*, 19.
37. See Stark, *For the Glory of God*.
38. For a detailed list, see David F. Coppedge, "The World's Greatest Creation Scientists: From Y1K to Y2K," Creation Safari, creationsafaris.com/wgcs_toc.htm.
39. This point has been well illustrated already, but additional supporting evidence comes from the eminent historian of science Ronald Numbers: "The greatest myth in the history of science and religion holds that they have been in a state of constant conflict." See Ronald L. Numbers, ed., *Galileo Goes to Jail and Other Myths about Science and Religion* (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2010), 1. See also David C. Lindberg, "Medieval Science and Religion," in *The History of Science and Religion in the Western Tradition: An Encyclopedia*, ed. Gary B. Ferngren (New York: Garland, 2000), 266.
40. Paul Davies, "Taking Science on Faith," *New York Times*, op-ed (November 24, 2007).
41. Davies, "Taking Science on Faith."
42. Davies, "Taking Science on Faith."
43. This list is wonderfully explained, illustrated, and footnoted in Nancy Pearcey and Charles Thaxton, *The Soul of Science: Christian Faith and Natural Philosophy* (Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 1994), 21–38.
44. Matthew 19:4: "He answered, 'Have you not read that he who created them from the beginning made them male and female'"; Mark 10:6–9: "From the beginning of creation, 'God made them male and female.' 'Therefore a man shall leave his father and mother and hold fast to his wife, and the two shall become one flesh.' So they are no longer two but one flesh. What therefore God has joined together, let not man separate."
45. See Norman L. Geisler, *Systematic Theology* (Minneapolis: Bethany, 2005), 2:632ff., for a good summary of the issue. Geisler says, "there are arguments for an old universe, some of which one may find persuasive. However, none of these is foolproof, and all of them may be wrong" (2:649). Those advocating an older universe include Hugh Ross, *Creator and the Cosmos*; Norman Geisler, *When Skeptics Ask*; Walter C. Kaiser Jr., *Hard Sayings of the Bible*; Don Stoner, *A New Look at an Old Earth*; and Francis S. Collins, *The Language of God*. Those presenting a younger earth include Walt Brown, *In the Beginning*; Larry Vardiman, Andrew Snelling, and Eugene F. Chaffin, ed., *Radioisotopes and the Age of the Earth*; Jonathan Sarfati, *Refuting Compromise*; and Henry Morris, *The Long War Against God*.
46. See Geisler, *Systematic Theology*, 2:632ff., for a good summary of the issue. *Creation and Time: A Biblical and Scientific Perspective on the Creation-Date Controversy*, by Hugh Ross (Colorado Springs, CO: NavPress, 1994), presents the case for an older universe, while *Refuting Compromise: A Biblical and Scientific Refutation of "Progressive Creationism" (Billions of Years) as Popularized by Astronomer Hugh Ross*, by Jonathan Sarfati (Powder Springs, GA: Creation Book Publishers, 2011), presents the case for a younger universe, along with Walt Brown, *In The Beginning* (Phoenix: Center for Scientific Creation, 2003) and volumes 1 and 2 of Larry Vardiman, Andrew A. Snelling, and Eugene F. Chaffin, ed., *Radioisotopes and the Age of the Earth* (El Cajon, CA: Institute for Creation Research, 2005).
47. Charles Darwin, *Autobiography* (New York: Dover, 1958), 59.
48. See Geoffrey Simmons, *What Darwin Didn't Know: A Doctor Dissects the Theory of Evolution* (Eugene, OR: Harvest House, 2004) for an up-to-date argument for creation from design.
49. Albert Einstein, *Ideas and Opinions* (New York: Crown, 1982), 40, quoted in Norman L. Geisler, *Systematic Theology* (Minneapolis: Bethany, 2003), 2:666.
50. Paul Davies, *Superforce* (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1984), 223.
51. See Michael J. Behe's *Darwin's Black Box: The Biochemical Challenge to Evolution* (New York: Free Press, 1996) for a full discussion on the complexity of the cell. Also, David Berlinski, "On the Origins of Life," *Commentary* 121, no. 5 (May 2006): 16. "Darwinian evolution," says Berlinski, "begins with self-replication, and self-replication is precisely what needs to be explained" (29).
52. Michael Denton, *Evolution: A Theory in Crisis* (Bethesda, MD: Adler & Adler, 1986), 250.
53. Bruce Alberts, "The Cell as a Collection of Protein Machines: Preparing the Next Generation of Molecular Biologists," *Cell* 92 (February 6, 1998): 291.
54. James A. Shapiro, "21st Century View of Evolution: Genome System Architecture, Repetitive DNA, and Natural Genetic Engineering," *Gene* 345 (2005): 91–100.
55. For more detail, see Norman L. Geisler and Frank Turek, *I Don't Have Enough Faith to Be an Atheist* (Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 2004) and Berlinski, "On the Origins of Life."
56. J. P. Moreland and William Lane Craig, *Philosophical Foundations for a Christian Worldview* (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity, 2003), 478.
57. Antony Flew and Roy Abraham Varghese, *There Is a God: How the World's Most Notorious Atheist Changed His Mind* (New York: HarperOne, 2007), 136, 145.
58. John L. Postlethwait and Janet L. Hopson, *Modern Biology* (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 2009), 281.
59. Postlethwait and Hopson, *Modern Biology*, 285.
60. Steven D. Garber, *Biology: A Self-Teaching Guide*, 2nd ed. (New York: Wiley, 2002), 3–5.
61. See Stanley L. Miller, "A Production of Amino Acids under Possible Primitive Earth Conditions," *Science* 117 (May 15, 1953): 528–29.
62. See Jonathan Wells, *Icons of Evolution: Why Much of What We Teach about Evolution Is Wrong* (Washington, DC: Regnery, 2000); Casey Luskin, "Not Making the Grade: An Evaluation of 19 Recent Biology Textbooks and Their Use of Selected Icons of Evolution," *Discovery Institute*, September 26, 2011, www.evolutionnews.org/DiscoveryInstitute_2011TextbookReview.pdf.
63. Casey Luskin, "The First Living Systems: A Bioenergetic Perspective," *Microbiology & Molecular Biology Reviews* 61 (1997): 239.
64. Jon Cohen, "Novel Center Seeks to Add Spark to Origins of Life," *Science* 270 (December 22, 1995): 1925–26.
65. Antonio C. Lasaga, H. D. Holland, and Michael J. Dwyer, "Primordial Oil Slick," *Science* 174 (October 1, 1971): 53–55.
66. Deborah Kelley on the Limits of Organic Life in Planetary Systems, Committee on the Origins and Evolution of Life, National Research Council, *The Limits of Organic Life in Planetary Systems* (Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2007), 60.
67. Van Noorden, "RNA World Easier to Make," *Nature*, May 13, 2009, www.nature.com/news/2009/090513/full/news.2009.471.html.
68. See Stephen C. Meyer, *Signature in the Cell: DNA and the Evidence for Intelligent Design* (New York: HarperOne, 2009), 304.
69. See Jack W. Szostak, David P. Bartel, and P. Luigi Luisi, "Synthesizing Life," *Nature* 409 (January 18, 2001): 387–90.
70. Michael Polanyi, "Life's Irreducible Structure," *Science* 160 (June 21, 1968), 1308–1312.
71. See William A. Dembski, *The Design Inference: Eliminating Chance through Small Probabilities* (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1998).
72. Robert Shapiro, "A Simpler Origin for Life," *Scientific American* (June, 2007): 46–53.
73. George M. Whitesides, "Revolutions in Chemistry: Priestley Medalist George M. Whitesides' Address," *Chemical and Engineering News* 85 (March 26, 2007): 12–17.
74. Francis Crick, *Life Itself: Its Origin and Nature* (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1981), 88.
75. The design argument is also called the teleological argument (telos is the Greek word for "final cause").
76. Charles Thaxton, "In Pursuit of Intelligent Causes: Some Historical Background" (unpublished essay presented at a Sources of Information Content in DNA, an international conference in Tacoma, Washington, June 23–26, 1988), 13.
77. Quoted in Eric Metaxas, *Socrates in the City: Conversations on "Life, God, and Other Small Topics"* (New York: Dutton, 2011), 316.
78. Antony Flew and Roy Abraham Varghese, *There Is a God: How the World's Most Notorious Atheist Changed His Mind* (New York: HarperOne, 2008).
79. Antony Flew and Gary Habermas, "My Pilgrimage from Atheism to Theism: A Discussion between Antony Flew and Gary Habermas," *Philosophia Christi* 6, no. 2 (2004): 201.
80. Barrow and Tipler do not believe that their arguments lead to a theistic result, but in the end, they seem to have two options: a designer or an infinite number of multiple universes from which evolution might have proceeded. See John D. Barrow and Frank J. Tipler, *The Anthropic Cosmological Principle* (New York: Oxford University Press, 1986). To read philosopher William Lane Craig's analysis of this dilemma, go to www.leaderu.com/offices/billcraig/docs/barrow.html.
81. Robert Jastrow, "A Scientist Caught between Two Faiths," *Christianity Today*, August 6, 1982, quoted in Norman L. Geisler, *Systematic Theology* (Bloomington, MN: Bethany, 2011), 28.
82. Charles Townes, quoted in Bonnie Azab Powell, "Explore as Much as We Can: Nobel Prize Winner Charles Townes on Evolution, Intelligent Design, and the Meaning of Life," *UC Berkeley NewsCenter*, June 17, 2005.
83. Pierre-Paul Grassé, *Evolution of Living Organisms: Evidence for a New Theory of Transformation* (New York: Academic Press, 1977), 87.
84. Lynn Margulis, quoted in Darry Madden, "UMass Scientist to Lead Debate on Evolutionary Theory," *Brattleboro (Vt.) Reformer* (February 3, 2006). Some have wondered whether superbugs (bacteria that are resistant to antibiotics) and superviruses (lethal viruses that occasionally emerge) might be proof of evolution. It is a complex question, but essentially antibacterial medicine works by getting bacteria to produce an enzyme that turns the antibiotic the bacteria uses to fight off other bacteria into a poison that kills itself. A superbug is a bacterium that has lost the ability to produce that enzyme. So in a way, it is a bacterium that has lost complexity. Viruses are different from bacteria in that they require a host to live and survive by "hijacking" the cellular production system of the host and using it to produce the virus. Superviruses, such as Ebola, are viruses that have probably been around as long as other viruses but are unable to spread as rapidly. Though more lethal (unless humans "weaponize" them through creating mutations in the laboratory, which is an obvious example of intelligent intervention), they tend to be confined to the host and perhaps those in closest contact with the host.
86. Lynn Margulis and Dorion Sagan, *Acquiring Genomes: A Theory of the Origins of the Species* (New York: Basic Books, 2003), 29.
87. Michael Syvanen, "Evolutionary Implications of Horizontal Gene Transfer," *Annual Review of Genetics* 46 (2012): 339–56.
88. Graham Lawton, "Why Darwin Was Wrong about the Tree of Life," *New Scientist*, January 21, 2009.
89. This is a reference to Leviticus 11:3–6 and Deuteronomy 14:7, which permit the children of Israel to eat animals that "chew the cud" but only if they have certain kinds of hooves. Animals such as camels and cows are classified as ruminants, which means they regurgitate their food and chew it once it has been partially digested. Rabbits do not meet this classification. For an explanation of what the rabbit does, see www.answersingenesis.org/contradictions-in-the-bible/do-rabbits-really-chew-the-cud/.
90. Jonathan Wells, *Icons of Evolution: Science or Myth?* (Washington, DC: Regnery, 2000). Judith Hooper, in *An Evolutionary Tale of Moths and Men: The Untold Story of Science and the Peppered Moth* (New York: Norton, 2002), spends a whole book on the peppered moth, the insect that has been used as scientific proof for evolution. Few could read what really happened and call this science.
91. See, for example, Alan D. Gishlick's article "Icons of Evolution?" on the website for the National Center for Science Education, ncse.com/creationism/analysis/icons-evolution. Gishlick received his PhD in vertebrate paleontology from Yale University. Jonathan Wells, who holds a PhD in molecular and cellular biology from the University of California at Berkeley and a PhD in religious studies from Yale University, has written a response to Gishlick's criticisms at the following link: www.discovery.org/a/1320.
92. Paul Davies, *The Mind of God: The Scientific Basis for a Rational World* (London: Simon & Schuster, 1992), 232, quoted in John Lennox, *Seven Days That Divide the World: The Beginning according to Genesis and Science* (Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2011), 99. For a discussion of atheists and nonreligious skeptics of neo-Darwinism and proponents of intelligent design, see Casey Luskin, "Are There Non-Religious Skeptics of Darwinian Evolution and Proponents of Intelligent Design?," *Christian Research Journal* 36, no. 2 (2013): 42–47.
93. Quoted in Paul Davies, *The Accidental Universe: The World You Thought You Knew* (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1982), 189.
94. See Casey Luskin, "Human Origins and the Fossil Record," in *Science and Human Origins* (Seattle: Discovery Institute Press, 2012), 45–83.
95. Paul Lemoine, "Introduction: De L'Evolution?," in *Encyclopedie Française*, vol. 5, ed. Anatole de Monzie, Lucien Paul Victor Febvre, and Gaston Berger (Paris: Société de gestion de l'Encyclopédie française, 1937–1966).
96. Kenneth Boa and Robert M. Bowman Jr., *Faith Has Its Reasons: Integrative Approaches to Defending the Christian Faith* (Downers Grove, IL: IVP Books, 2012).
97. Quoted in Clyde S. Kilby, ed., *A Mind Awake: An Anthology of C. S. Lewis* (New York: Harcourt, Brace & World, 1968), 240.
