<!-- page-325 -->
# Chapter 13: Isn't Claiming Truth Intolerant?

## 1. Can We All Just Get Along?

"Hey, what's new?"

My friend and his neighbor had always gotten along well, but this time my friend's heart pounded when asked the question. "Well," he said, swallowing hard, "I've had something spiritual happen."

"What?"

<!-- page-326 -->

"I've become a Christian."

"Well, that makes sense. You're not Muslim or Hindu, after all," the neighbor joked.

"No. I mean, it's more than that. I don't just mean that my culture has changed. I had a conversion. I trusted Jesus Christ as my Savior."

"Oh, cool. I'm happy for you."

"Thank you."

"But I have a question. Does this mean you now believe I am a bad person and am going to hell?"

Somehow my friend managed to make it through the conversation, but he wasn't at all happy with how it turned out. In an email to me, he asked, "What am I supposed to say?" It is confusing because it was not his spiritual state that bothered the neighbor as much as the fact that, from his neighbor's viewpoint, my friend had embraced intolerance.

But who was *really* being intolerant in this situation? Was it my friend, for letting it be known that he had embraced new convictions, or the neighbor for assuming that these new convictions were intolerant because they claimed to be right? By confronting my friend over this, the neighbor made it clear that any views that make others feel bad are bad.

Such is the confusing world of belief these days. People can be touchy about what others believe. One example I came across recently is of a blogger who is a professor in his day job but uses his blog www.iloveyoubutyouregoingto hell.org to express how bad Christians are merely bad for claiming that they are right. The author simply will not tolerate what he perceives to be others' intolerance.

As someone who has spent much of my life working with college students, I understand why both my friend and his neighbor felt a sense of hurt: we naturally want to be at peace with people, even those with whom we strongly disagree. Brian Jones, a pastor from Philadelphia, phrases it nicely:

> The reality is that I want to live like religion doesn't matter too; I want to live like what I actually believe isn't that important. I like being liked. I don't like making waves. I don't like making people feel awkward. But I can't back down from what I know to be true. Sheer logic will not let me do that.<sup>1</sup>

As we've already seen, neighborly Christians display their love for God. Being neighborly, however, doesn't make disagreements over beliefs disappear. For example, Christians believe in an afterlife. Buddhists reject this belief and say that life is a cycle of rebirths. Both beliefs cannot both be true at the same time (though they could both be false at the same time, which is what the atheist believes). This disagreement between the two will hang over the relationship of a Christian and a Buddhist, at least if they take their respective beliefs seriously.

Today, though, many people call into question the idea that religious beliefs necessarily conflict with one another, or they say that even if they do conflict, it does not really matter. We each have a bit of insight into the world, it is believed, and if we work together, we can figure out the whole truth. Often this belief is expressed through parables such as that of six blind men who come into contact with an elephant: one handles the tail and exclaims that an elephant is like a rope, another grasps a leg and describes the elephant as a tree trunk, a third feels the tusk and says the animal is similar to a spear, and so on. Because each feels only a

<!-- page-327 -->

small portion of the whole elephant, all six men give correspondingly different descriptions of their experience. Only by putting all of their observations together can they arrive at a complete picture of the elephant.

In other words, by this analogy, we only *think* we are right because we don't see the big picture.

## 2. What It Means to Claim to Know the Truth

But as with all analogies, the elephant example is limited, and limited in such a way that the supposed truth it illustrates is questionable as well. The story assumes that there actually is an elephant as well as someone—the person telling the story perhaps—who knows the elephant well enough to see that each blind man has only a partial picture.

The heart of Christianity's claim is that someone exists who is not blind, who has complete knowledge, and who has, throughout the course of history, revealed some of this knowledge to us. The Bible, Christians say, is the record of God's creation and his plan for redemption through Jesus Christ. The Bible describes Jesus as the true and living way.<sup>2</sup> He is the key to reality itself.<sup>3</sup> So, although humans are fallen creatures and cannot know the truth exhaustively, Christianity says we can know *truly* that which God has revealed.

This leads inevitably to conflict. Either Christians correctly describe reality when they speak of a loving, wise, just, personal, creative God or they are talking nonsense. If they are talking nonsense, they may even be hurting other people by saying they know the full truth when they don't.

When it comes to God, the idea of claiming to have truth means those claims must be grounded in knowledge. In order for someone to claim truth about any given subject, he or she must have reasons for claiming that truth. Mere belief, even sincere belief that rings true to many people, isn't enough. We saw earlier in this text that to really know something, a person must have a "justified true belief." A **belief** is an idea one has about reality, and this idea can be true or false; that is, the idea either corresponds to reality or it doesn't. But having only a "true belief" doesn't count as knowledge, as we might sometimes be lucky enough to "guess correctly" about reality every now and then (and guessing correctly, we know, isn't really knowing). So we need to have *warrant* for our beliefs too, which means having good reasons to have a belief. Some ways to justify our beliefs are reason, observation, experience, introspection, or authority. I am justified, for example, to believe that the chair in which I am sitting will hold me up because I have sat in it many times and it's always held me up, something I know through experience. I am justified in believing that I am angry or happy by introspecting, by looking inside myself. I am justified in believing I will do well on my driver's test because I have studied and understood the material and practiced. When my justified beliefs are true, then and only then can I call them **knowledge**.

> **Belief:** an idea someone holds about the nature of reality.

> **Knowledge:** justified true belief.

Insofar as it is possible to have justified true beliefs about God, it is possible to have knowledge about him.

Of course, Christianity recognizes that other religions have discovered some truths about God. We find

<!-- page-328 -->

many grains of truth on the shores of almost all world religions. Still, biblical Christianity claims to have true knowledge about God by which we can assess claims about his existence and what he requires of us. When Christians proclaim this, many dismiss them as intolerant, a label that is appropriate for anyone, including Christians, who arrogantly shuns people or makes hurtful comments. It's wrong, however, to think that all Christians are intolerant because some have behaved badly. It's like saying that Mozart is a bad composer because your nine-year-old sister plays his compositions poorly. Also, the label "intolerant" is often thrown at Christians not for their behavior but for their beliefs. Is the mere act of claiming to know truth intolerant?

To see if the "intolerant" label actually fits, we should outline a working definition of truth, learn whether religious truth claims count as knowledge, understand the meaning of tolerance, and respond thoughtfully to those who believe that claiming the truth is intolerant. In this chapter, we hope to accomplish this and one other goal: to develop a curious, determined, and humble spirit that enables others to see through our faults and focus on the truth.

## 3. The Reigning Idea of Tolerance

**Tolerance** means recognizing and respecting the dignity of people you think are wrong. Today, tolerance is defined as accepting the views of others as equally true and valid. Christian author Dallas Willard says, "No longer is tolerance a matter of saying 'I disagree with you and I believe you're wrong.' That's not enough. We're now in the situation where everyone must be equally right, where you cannot claim that people are wrong and still love them."<sup>5</sup>

> **Tolerance:** the willingness to recognize and respect the dignity of those with whom one disagrees.

Traditional Christians are often accused of being the worst offenders. Teresa Whitehurst, a liberal Christian commentator, says, "Conservative Christians have adopted the warrior mentality of Onward Christian Soldiers, and intolerance is nothing to be hidden under a white robe and pointed white hood: it's to be waved proudly as a flag demonstrating Christian rigor and personal righteousness."<sup>6</sup>

Wow. By referring to white robes and pointed white hoods, Whitehurst is making a bigoted comparison between Christians with firm beliefs and Ku Klux Klan members who terrorized and even killed those they disagreed with, even fellow Christians. It's not only a harsh, unfair comparison but also a false one. Sadly, it's common. In researching for their book *unChristian*, David Kinnaman and Gabe Lyons asked young adults ages sixteen through twenty-nine who did not regularly attend church which characteristics were descriptive of the church "a lot" or "some." "Judgmental" was used by 87 percent to describe the church, and 70 percent described it as "insensitive to others." In fact, 84 percent of these non-church-attenders said they knew a Christian personally, but only 15 percent said they saw any lifestyle differences in those Christians.<sup>7</sup>

The realization that people see Christians primarily as hypocritical judgers rather than truth bearers should give us pause. If we are participating in demeaning behavior or are devaluing others, we ought to repent and seek to be conformed to the image of Christ. However, does the fact that people find biblical truth offensive mean we should stop proclaiming it?

<!-- page-329 -->

According to three popular viewpoints, the answer is yes. Let's look at each of these viewpoints to see if they are correct to say that religious truth cannot be known and therefore should not be proclaimed.

## 4. Postmodernism: Religious Truth Cannot Be Known

> **Postmodernism:** a skeptical worldview, founded as a reaction to modernism, that is suspicious of metanarratives and teaches that ultimate reality is inaccessible, knowledge is a social construct, and truth claims are political power plays.

The influence of Postmodernism has resulted in people believing that religious knowledge differs from "actual" knowledge because Postmodernists maintain that reality cannot be known by us—that what we call knowledge is just our use of language to give ourselves and others the impression that we know what is going on. Postmodernists, then, dismiss any viewpoint as being characterized as true. The words we use to make this case are just words, they say. No necessary relationship exists between words describing religious knowledge and reality. That is, talk about "God" is just talk; it doesn't actually refer to God.

Postmodernists say that no religion's story of God, humans, or salvation is true. In other words, they reject all metanarratives. If no metanarratives can describe reality, then of course Christianity is doomed, as are all other religions that try to make sense of life. Further, if no metanarrative is true, then we can't "all have sinned and fall short of God's glory" (Rom. 3:23),<sup>8</sup> nor could God love the human race (John 3:16),<sup>9</sup> nor could Christ have died for our sins (1 John 2:2).<sup>10</sup> Christianity, then, is implausible.

Usually Postmodernists don't present their cases so bleakly. They don't want to be the Grinch who stole Christmas; they just want people to stop believing that Christmas has any connection to truth. But maybe the Postmodernist is wrong. After all, if our language does not point to any truth, then the claim that "Christians are intolerant" can't be true. Nor can the claim that no one can know whether God exists because that, too, is a claim about reality.

Christian philosophers J. P. Moreland and Garrett DeWeese argue that at the end of the day, we can know things based on good reasons: "We don't trust a plumber who diagnoses our stomachache as appendicitis just because he believes it is, no matter how sincere his belief; we go to a doctor who knows about the appendix.... When it comes to our religious faith, it is no different."<sup>11</sup>

Christians believe that atheists are wrong, but they don't think atheists' words are meaningless. So if language can be used in moral judgments about tolerance and God's existence when it comes to views hostile to Christianity, surely such language can be used in moral and theological judgments about God in support of Christianity.

It is better to assume that thoughts are about real things and are intended to be about real things.<sup>12</sup> So the next time someone says that "no religious belief can be known to be true," don't be shocked into silence. Just say, "That sounds like a belief about religion. How do you know it is true?"

## 5. Pluralism 1.0: Religious Truth Is Individual

<!-- page-330 -->

Perhaps someone has said to you, "That may be true for you, but not for me. Truth is relative." Francis Beckwith and Greg Koukl, in their book *Relativism: Feet Firmly Planted in Mid-Air*, say, "Today we've lost confidence that statements of fact can ever be anything more than just opinions; we no longer know that anything is certain beyond our subjective preferences. The word *truth* now means 'true for me' and nothing more. We have entered an era of dogmatic skepticism."<sup>13</sup> Beckwith and Koukl have hit on something important. Polls show that a very high percentage of people—in some surveys, as high as 90 percent—believe that truth and morality are relative to our situation.<sup>14</sup> For people who believe this, our claims to "know" something comes across as arrogant and presumptuous.

> Polls show that a very high percentage of people—in some surveys, as high as 90 percent—believe that truth and morality are relative to our situation.

Part of the problem is that people assume that religious experiences are completely individual and that no one has an objective enough standpoint from which to say that certain experiences are tied to perceptions that are evidentially verifiable.

Some people insist that it is offensive to claim to have true knowledge about religion. To them, saying that one's beliefs are true and other peoples' are not is like saying, "I'm sorry you're not smart enough to see what I see," or, "If you were a good person, you would abandon that belief." In this view, claiming to know the truth is the kind of thing bullies do when trying to hurt other people's feelings.<sup>15</sup>

Pluralism 1.0 says, how could anyone else say they know the truth for *me*? It's offensive and counterintuitive to say *you* know the truth for *me*. After all, my experiences are personal in the sense that *my* eyes can only bring visual images into *my* brain, where they are interpreted based on *my* own thinking.

> If truth is actually out there, my perceptions might affect how I understand it, but they do not affect the nature of truth itself.

> Our internal experiences are externally validated when we can see they are held in common, providing a compelling warrant for the belief that God is working all over the world.

But these objections can be sustained only if, in fact, there is no actual truth to perceive. If truth is actually out there, my perceptions might affect how I understand it, but they do not affect the nature of truth itself. A blue plush suede cushioned chair, for example, does not change its nature to become a brown oak hardback chair just because you and I perceive it differently.

If, on the other hand, truth actually exists, then it is possible for each person to perceive it individually and also experience it in a similar way as other people. We in the West tend to believe that we each experience God differently. But if I, a Christian, compared my experiences with God to the experiences of other Christians around the world, I would see that my experiences are more similar to theirs than I imagined.<sup>16</sup> We all experi-

<!-- page-331 -->

ence God's presence, a sense of remorse over sin, a call to accept God's offer of forgiveness, and relief that he has healed us and is preparing us for a new kind of life. Our internal experiences are externally validated when we can see they are held in common, providing a compelling warrant for the belief that God is working all over the world.

Other religions are not like Christianity in this respect. Most religions are tied directly to an ethnic identity. In spite of massive publicity campaigns tied to the conversion of a handful of well-known actors and actresses, Buddhism remains mostly in the Far East. (Plus, Buddhism in China looks far different than Buddhism in California). Hinduism is the religion of India. Islam is prevalent in the Middle East and Indonesia, where people in its principles have gained influence.

Christianity may sometimes seem to be the religion of the West, but Christianity transcends ethnic identity. Christian conversions have taken place and are taking place all over the world and across all racial, ethnic, and age groups.

How might this be explained?

Of course, some people say Christianity initially grew through force. This is true of Islam and Marxism, but the evidence for Christianity spreading this way is slim. As we will see, where Christianity has taken root and spread, it is largely because Christians moved into an area and attracted followers through a winsome lifestyle and moral persuasion.<sup>17</sup>

> As we will see, where Christianity has taken root and spread, it is largely because Christians moved into an area and attracted followers through a winsome lifestyle and moral persuasion.

In the case of Christianity, the simplest theory is that Christian conversions are genuine experiences of people encountering some kind of reality that people all over the world—regardless of cultural background, race, national identity, or language—can discern.<sup>18</sup> As Cambridge philosopher C. D. Broad suggested, we should treat these experiences as truthful unless we have positive evidence that they are delusional.<sup>19</sup>

> Certainly, people are more likely to embrace whatever religion dominates the culture in which they are raised. But the fact that people all over the world have willingly converted to Christianity, making it the largest religion in the world, is a phenomenon unprecedented in history.

Certainly, people are more likely to embrace whatever religion dominates the culture in which they are raised. But the fact that people all over the world have willingly converted to Christianity, making it the largest religion in the world, is a phenomenon unprecedented in history.

## 6. Pluralism 2.0: Religious Truth Is Cultural

> If someone says that our religious beliefs come from our cultural or historical situations and are thus not actually true, he or she is also saying to all world religions, "Your truth claims are not valid, but mine are." It seems to be an intolerant thing to say for someone who claims to be advancing the cause of tolerance.

Although some believe that truth is relative to individuals, others believe it is relative to cultures. One such individual was philosopher of religion John Hick, whom we discussed earlier. Hick grew up as an evangelical Christian, but through his exposure to people of different religions at his university, he became convinced that each culture has its own religious truths and that all of these truths are equally valid.

<!-- page-332 -->

Yet, as Alvin Plantinga points out, people all over the world seem to have always assumed that their own religion is the true one, and it is only in our own age that people began to widely embrace the idea that no one religion is actually true for everyone. If Hick had been born in another culture or time, Plantinga argues, it probably never would have occurred to him to believe that no religion has a legitimate claim to ultimate truth.<sup>20</sup>

If someone says that our religious beliefs come from our cultural or historical situations and are thus not actually true, he or she is also saying to all world religions, "Your truth claims are not valid, but mine are." It seems to be an intolerant thing to say for someone who claims to be advancing the cause of tolerance.

The idea that each religious viewpoint is true for those who hold it may seem to resolve the tensions among religious viewpoints, but it also creates all kinds of problems. As we asked in an earlier chapter, are religions that hold that women are of a lower status than men—that women may be beaten or killed without penalty—as valid as those that hold that women should be protected? Are religions that hold that it is good to kill and eat one's enemies as valid as those that say we ought to love them?

Christians who wish to be tolerant—according to the new definition of tolerance—must forfeit the belief that Jesus died for everyone and that he is the true way to God. The world's view of tolerance guts the gospel and removes the heart of the historic Christian worldview.

So who can meaningfully participate in the global conversation about religious belief? Could anyone qualify? What about those who have no meaningful beliefs? Wouldn't it be better for each of us to make the case for what is *true* regardless of time and culture rather than forfeiting our knowledge out of deference to other beliefs? To answer these questions, we need an understanding of what truth actually is.

## 7. What Is Truth Anyway?

"Peanut butter milkshakes are awesome" differs from "Five plus five equals ten," as one statement makes a claim about one's opinion, and the other claims something about reality.

The first is based on a **subjective truth claim**, a kind of claim shared by those who greatly enjoy peanut butter milkshakes.<sup>21</sup> The second is an **objective truth claim**, a claim that all thinking people will rightly embrace. It corresponds with reality. Something is true if and only if it lines up with the way things actually are.

> **Subjective Truth Claim:** a claim regarding a dependent fact about a subject.

> **Objective Truth Claim:** a claim regarding an independent fact about the world.

Subjective truth claims deal with matters of preference or taste, while objective truth claims deal with the way the world actually is for all people everywhere. Subjective truth claims are about the "subject" (i.e., person) who is making the claim, not about the properties of what they're talking about. For example, "Fall is the best season," "Blue is the best color," and "Coke is better than Pepsi" are subjective truth claims. Objective truth claims attempt to accurately name properties of the "object," things that can be known to be true or false. Examples of objective truth claims include things such as, "Murder is against the law in Kansas," "The boiling point of water is 212 degrees Fahrenheit,"

<!-- page-333 -->

"James Garfield was assassinated by Charles Guiteau in 1881," and "Jesus is the Son of God, who offers salvation to any who would believe in him."

But I caught you on that last one. To Postmodernists and religious pluralists of the types I described earlier, the statement about Jesus falls into a category of things that are spiritual and cannot actually be known rather than the category of what counts as true knowledge. But keep in mind our definition of truth—knowledge: something is true if and only if it lines up with the way things actually are in the world. The **correspondence theory of truth** is described by authors Norman Geisler and Joseph Holden as follows:

> **Correspondence Theory of Truth:** the view that the truth of a proposition is determined by how accurately it describes the facts of reality.

> Remember, a distinction between our statements and the facts as they are in the real world must exist or else there could be no way of discovering which statements are true and which are false. The fancy name for this definition of truth is the "correspondence theory" because truth corresponds or relates to reality (the real world) as it actually is.<sup>22</sup>

Would it be reasonable for you to respond to my comment "It is raining outside" by saying, "It may be raining outside for you, but it isn't raining outside for me"? Couldn't my claim be verified? If we both understand what rain is, we could look out the window to see if my claim corresponds to reality. My claim "It is raining outside, is true if and only if it lines up with the way things actually are—if it *corresponds* to reality.

This is all well and good, but here's the big question: Are religious claims knowable in the same way as facts about rain or the boiling point of water? Let's have a look.

## 8. Is It Possible to Know the Truth about Religious Claims?

In the case of a claim about the natural world or historical events, we must examine evidence to see if the claims correspond to reality. In the natural world, we might use the scientific method to observe, measure, and, if possible, repeat experiments to see what happens under stable conditions. For claims about historical events, we might examine newspaper accounts, listen to the testimonies of witnesses, or perhaps look at pictures or watch film footage. In either case, it would be silly to say, "Well, maybe water boils at 212 degrees Fahrenheit for you, but in my culture it is different," or, "Perhaps it is true for you that Martin Luther King Jr. was shot on April 4, 1968, but how dare you impose that belief on me!" We can know these things. We don't label people as intolerant if they proclaim them. The question is, Can we claim religious knowledge in the same way that we claim scientific or historical knowledge?

If you've read the earlier chapters in this book, you can probably guess that the answer is yes. We can examine the biblical record, philosophical arguments, historical works from those living in Bible times, and so forth to come to an understanding that the biblical record corresponds to reality.

But what about such claims as "It is a bad thing to steal"? Is such a moral claim subject to knowledge? We think it is, and here's why: no matter what one's background or beliefs,

<!-- page-334 -->

everyone in the world must answer a few basic questions to live in the real world. Here is Christian author and speaker James Sire's list of such questions:

1. What is prime reality—the really real? (Is God the prime reality, or multiple gods, or the universe?)

2. What is the nature of external reality (the world around us)? (Was the world created, has it always existed, is it chaotic or orderly?)

3. What is a human being? (A highly complex machine, a sleeping god, a person made in the image of God, an animal?)

4. What happens to persons at death? (Are we reincarnated, simply cease to exist, go to heaven or hell?)

5. Why is it possible to think anything at all? (Were we made by an intelligent, all-knowing God, or did our consciousness develop through the long process of evolution?)

6. How do we know right from wrong? (Is morality determined by our own choice and whatever feels good? Is it based on what society says is moral? Is it based on the character of God?)

7. What is the meaning of human history? (Is it based on the purposes of a god or the gods, or is it to create some type of paradise on earth?)<sup>23</sup>

As soon as a religion makes a truth claim about one of these questions, it is making a claim about the nature of reality. Such statements are not mere preferences or opinions. They cannot be true for one person and false for someone else, especially if they are contrary to one another.<sup>24</sup>

Let's illustrate this with a silly example. Imagine a person were to tell you she believes that the world's troubles will be solved when we are all rescued by pink flying elephants. Imagine further that this is a deeply held belief and that she is willing to endure the mockery of others because of her belief. Could we evaluate such a truth claim? Of course. At the very least, we can say that there is no good reason to hold such a belief because pink flying elephants have never been observed to exist.

Some people view statements about God similarly. No one has seen God, so how is belief in God fundamentally different than belief in pink flying elephants? The only way to answer this question is to point out, as we have seen in earlier chapters, that there is strong warrant for belief in God's existence.

Moreland and DeWeese put it this way: "What should matter in matters of faith is knowledge, not merely sincere belief; good reasons, not mere hunches; truth, not feelings. We can rightly say that Christianity is a knowledge tradition, meaning it is more than ritual or emotions. Christianity claims certain things can be known."<sup>25</sup> This has a tremendous impact on

<!-- page-335 -->

how we view matters of religious faith. Faith has to do with certain claims about reality that are not in the realm of the subjective but in the realm of the objective. Although experiences and feelings can certainly bolster our faith, faith itself cannot be reduced to emotions and opinions no matter how sincere they may be. Faith is rooted in the soil of knowledge and reality.

Good arguments about God have been articulated by scholars for millennia, and these arguments have never been adequately refuted. The remaining question is this: Is Christianity the best way of knowing about God?

## 9. Christian View of Truth: Knowable, Sharable, Exclusive

To say that the Christian worldview is true is to say that it best describes the contours of the world as it actually exists.<sup>26</sup> For example, Christianity says that the universe is a product of design and that this fact is observable by everyone, whether or not that truth has been suppressed by other commitments.

Christianity's correspondence with the observable moral order of the world is another aspect of Christianity's justified true belief. As Francis Schaeffer pointed out, "If there is no absolute beyond man's ideas, then there is no final appeal to judge between individuals and groups whose moral judgments conflict. We are merely left with conflicting opinions."<sup>27</sup> To paraphrase C. S. Lewis, if moral judgment is impossible, then whether we like certain values is just a preference for certain impulses based on how strongly we feel them rather than based on whether they are actually real.<sup>28</sup> In a world of merely conflicting opinions, those best able to muster the power to get their way will always win. The biblical idea is that **moral absolutes** are not around to benefit the stronger and meaner but rather to protect the weak. Bullies are not right just because they are mightier. Common sense tells us that only bullies disagree with this claim.

> **Moral Absolute:** an objective, unchanging, and universal standard of right and wrong.

So far every culture in the world has understood and embraced moral absolutes to buffer society from the influence of raw power. Richard H. Beis, professor emeritus of philosophy at St. Mary's University in Nova Scotia, collected a list of moral absolutes that seem to be true in every culture that anthropologists have studied:

- Prohibition of murder or maiming without justification
- Prohibition of lying, at least in certain areas such as oaths, etc.
- Right to own property such as land, clothing, tools, etc.
- Economic justice: reciprocity and restitution
- Preference of common good over individual good
- Sexual restriction within all societies<sup>29</sup>

<!-- page-336 -->

- Reciprocal duties between children and parents: parents care for and train children, and children respect, obey, and care for parents in old age
- Loyalty to one's social unit (family, tribe, country)
- Provision for poor and unfortunate
- Prohibition of theft
- Prevention of violence within in-groups
- Obligation to keep promises
- Obedience to leaders
- Respect for the dead and disposal of human remains in some traditional and ritualistic fashion
- Desire for and priority of immaterial goods (knowledge, values, etc.)
- Obligation to be a good mother
- Distributive justice (fairness)
- Inner rather than external sanctions considered better
- Recognizing courage as a virtue
- Identifying justice as an obligation<sup>30</sup>

People who believe there are moral absolutes think moral rules are universal because they are universally true, revealed to everyone. Yes, they work, and, in that, they are good. But they are not good because they work; they work *because they are good*. They are sensible because they are true, not the other way around. Christians can think this way because they believe the Bible's revelation of God's nature and character. From a biblical viewpoint, it is not that the truth is *unknowable* or that we are confused; it is that truth is *knowable* and we have *rebelled*. Even fallen humans can know the truth, and we ought to encourage one another to embrace it.

## 10. How Different Worldviews Respond to Christian Truth Claims

Although some insist that Christianity is intolerant because they do not think it is right for anyone to claim his or her religion as true, they likely believe that at least one

<!-- page-337 -->

religion—Christianity—is actually making a *false* claim and that they know better. This rejection almost always springs from one of two perspectives.

You may remember that **monism** means a belief in "one substance" and **dualism** means a belief in "two substances." Whereas Christianity (as well as Islam and other theistic religions) believes that both the material and immaterial worlds exist, most nontheistic worldviews believe in one or the other. Worldviews such as **Secularism** and **Marxism** choose **materialism**, saying that only the material world exists. Worldviews lining up with "New Spirituality," on the other hand, choose **spiritual monism**, saying that reality is ultimately divine—that the physical world is an illusion. If someone says that Christianity is intolerant, find out whether the person actually believes that the spiritual world is real. If he doesn't, then obviously he is going to disagree with Christianity as well as with just about all other world religions. If the person thinks the physical world is an illusion, he is also going to object to Christianity, but because he believes that the tools of knowledge can never reveal ultimate truth.

Just so you're prepared to deal with each of these viewpoints, let's examine them in a little more detail.

> **Monism:** the belief that reality is ultimately composed of one essential substance.

> **Dualism:** the belief that reality is ultimately composed of two essential substances.

> **Secularism:** an atheistic and materialistic worldview that advocates for a public society free from the influence of religion.

> **Marxism:** an atheistic and materialistic worldview based on the ideas of Karl Marx that promotes the abolition of private property, the public ownership of the means of production (such as socialism), and the utopian dream of a future communistic state.

> **Spiritual Monism:** the belief that reality is ultimately divine.

### The First Kind of Monism: Only the Material Exists

In the television series *The Day the Universe Changed*, science historian James Burke says, "There is no metaphysical, super-ordinary, final, absolute reality. There is no special direction to events. The universe is what we say it is. When theories change, the universe changes. The truth is relative."<sup>31</sup> What is just is. If we perceive any special meaning, it is because we are making it up to explain the world better to ourselves. And over time, such explanations change. As German social psychologist Erich Fromm asserts, "Man creates himself in the historical process."<sup>32</sup>

People who think that truth is relative and based on societal consensus usually bristle when religious and political authorities imply that *their* perception of reality is actually *true*. Well-known philosopher Richard Rorty, for example, was fond of quoting the French revolutionary Denis Diderot in his speeches: "Man will never be free until the last king is strangled with the entrails of

<!-- page-338 -->

the last priest."<sup>33</sup> Rorty, whose particular viewpoint is called *pragmatism*, thought that the world just is and that people who claim to know the truth are merely trying to trick people into going along with their agendas.

Ironically, although Rorty was probably just attempting to be witty with the quote about kings and priests, other materialists have developed entire worldviews justifying violent opposition to those who express truth claims contrary to their own. Vladimir Lenin, the leader of the Russian revolution and founder of Soviet communism, stated flatly, "The philosophical basis of Marxism, as Marx and Engels repeatedly declared, is ... a materialism which is absolutely atheistic and positively hostile to all religion."<sup>34</sup> Elsewhere, Lenin made it clear that fighting religion was an essential ingredient in a materialistic reality. "We must combat religion," he said, "that is the ABC of all materialism, and consequently of Marxism."<sup>35</sup> Lenin didn't just object to religion; he openly promoted atheism.<sup>36</sup> "Every religious idea, every idea of God, even flirting with the idea of God, is unutterable vileness ... vileness of the most dangerous kind, 'contagion' of the most abominable kind," he said.<sup>37</sup>

Judging by their rhetoric, it would appear that many materialists believe that supernatural religion is *dangerous*, not just wrong. Harvard's Edward O. Wilson broadly accuses people who believe in the Bible of practicing an aggressive "fundamentalist religion," which he describes as "one of the unmitigated evils of the world."<sup>38</sup>

Even more moderate materialist voices, such as the pragmatist philosopher Sidney Hook, insist that we can have a good society only if religious people give up their claims to truth: "The democratic open society must be neutral to all religious overbeliefs; but no matter how secular it conceives itself to be, it cannot be neutral to moral issues. It seeks to draw these issues into the area of public discussion in the hope that a reasonable consensus may be achieved."<sup>39</sup> Of course, this consensus must be based on some set of beliefs. But whose, and on what basis?

### The Second Kind of Monism: Only the Spiritual Exists

A second kind of monism exists that denies the material world and says that only the spiritual world exists. My broad label for this is **New Spirituality**, which is a worldview held by people who see truth as known by feeling or experience, not by scientific, logical, or even religious knowledge, at least of the Christian kind. Author and speaker Marilyn Ferguson states, "We need not postulate a purpose for this Ultimate Cause nor wonder who or what caused whatever Big Bang launched the visible universe. There is only the experience."<sup>40</sup> Author Eckhart Tolle agrees: "The Truth is inseparable from who you are. Yes, you are the Truth. If you look for it elsewhere, you will be deceived every time."<sup>41</sup>

> **New Spirituality:** a pantheistic worldview that teaches that everything and everyone are connected through divine consciousness.

In New Spiritualist writings, it is clear that most New Spiritualists reject the personal God of the Bible as a dangerous myth separating people into religious factions. No one approach to God is correct. Bestselling New Spiritualist author Neale Donald Walsch claims that God revealed to him personally, "No path to God is more direct than any other path. No religion is

<!-- page-339 -->

the 'one true religion.'"<sup>42</sup> In an interview with journalist Bill Moyers, filmmaker George Lucas said, "The conclusion I've come to is that all the religions are true."<sup>43</sup> Lucas and Walsch's conviction is shared in the wider population, even among many Christians. According to George Barna, 63 percent of the teenagers surveyed agree that "Muslims, Buddhists, Christians, Jews, and all other people pray to the same god, even though they use different names for their god."<sup>44</sup> So, the claim continues, if we don't have peace on earth yet, it is only because some wrongly persist in their exclusionist beliefs.

Next we move on to how to defuse the most common slogans people raise against Christians in the name of tolerance.

## 11. Is Tolerance a Virtue?

People disagree all the time—in politics, science, philosophy, and virtually every other academic subject—but when it comes to issues of faith, embracing all beliefs as equally valid is considered a high moral virtue. To disagree is seen as a grave moral error.

Popularly, embracing all beliefs as valid is called "tolerance." But as noted earlier, this isn't tolerance. Authors Brad Stetson and Joseph Conti pose some interesting thoughts:

> There is widespread feeling today that something is very wrong with the way we think about tolerance. We have intuition that in our diverse society tolerance is very important to practice, but at the same time we are unable to agree on what exactly it means to be tolerant. Does tolerance require the acceptance of all views on a given subject as equally true? Does it mean that I must not believe too strongly that my views are right about a given subject? Can I be tolerant and still believe in objective truth about religion, ethics and politics?<sup>45</sup>

Stetson and Conti conclude that the commonly accepted definition of tolerance misses the mark. So what should we replace it with? J. Warner Wallace, a cold-case detective and Christian apologist, simply points to the YourDictionary.com definition, which says that tolerance is "a tolerating or being tolerant, especially of views, beliefs, practices, etc. of others that differ from one's own." When asked what it is to tolerate something, the same source says that we tolerate someone when we "recognize and respect [others' beliefs, practices, and so forth] without sharing them." According to TheFreeDictionary.com, *tolerate* can be defined as "to put up with" or "endure" something.<sup>46</sup>

As Wallace notes, for there to be tolerance, the following is necessary:

- Two or more people must exist.
- These folks must hold divergent views, beliefs, or practices. In other words, they must DISAGREE.
- These same folks must endure one another. In other words, they cannot eliminate each other even though they don't embrace each other's beliefs, but must instead find a way to peacefully co-exist.<sup>47</sup>

<!-- page-340 -->

Professor of philosophy Paul Copan makes an excellent point about this: "If disagreement didn't exist, then tolerance would be unneeded. It's the existence of real differences between people that make tolerance necessary and virtuous."<sup>48</sup>

To reach a point of true tolerance, we must recognize that each of us has the freedom to believe what we want, whether true or false. However, the right to hold these beliefs does not mean they are equally true or valid or that to disagree with another's choice is somehow evil. *True tolerance* is the ability to disagree with someone and yet still live in peace. *False tolerance* is the intellectually dishonest practice of pretending that all beliefs are equally true and valid while actually believing that only one view—such as materialism or New Spirituality—is really the only true view.

Perhaps a word about living in peace is in order here. Because the Bible so often uses the metaphor of war to describe the spiritual conflict between good and evil, some Christians believe they are justified in using insulting language to put down those who do not hold to Christian beliefs. Harsh language, name-calling, and insults, though, are the weapons the world uses to exercise control over those who do not toe the party line. Christians' weapons should be different. Second Corinthians 10:4 says, "The weapons of our warfare are not of the flesh but have divine power to destroy strongholds."

What are "weapons of the flesh"? Galatians 5:19–21<sup>49</sup> says they include, among other things, "enmity [hostility], strife, jealousy, fits of anger, rivalries, dissensions, divisions, [and] envy." The works of the Holy Spirit, on the other hand, are "love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, gentleness, [and] self-control" (vv. 22–23). It is one thing to disagree with people; it is another thing entirely to disagree with them and do so as God desires.

Mere tolerance pales in comparison to these admirable virtues. J. Budziszewski writes,

> Our most gifted thinkers no longer treat tolerance as a queenly virtue to be guarded among many others equally precious, but as a shrewish virtue that excludes all the rest. For now we are told that the meaning of tolerance is ethical neutrality about which things are worth the love of human beings and which traits of character are worth praising.<sup>50</sup>

Perhaps we should raise our sights above mere tolerance and seek to act virtuously, hold as many true beliefs as possible, and enter into a dialogue of ideas where truth can be sought after and discovered. Here are three ways to do this.

## 12. Response 1: Defuse False Ideas of Tolerance

Two common errors often committed by those who claim that Christians are intolerant are (1) self-refuting claims and (2) weak slogans meant to stop Christians in their tracks.

> **Self-Refuting Claim:** a statement that attempts to affirm two opposite propositions at the same time and in the same sense.

### Self-Refuting Claims

Many statements about truth, according to Greg Koukl, commit suicide. In other words, they self-destruct because they contradict themselves. **Self-refuting claims** attempt to affirm two opposite propositions. If they are true, they are false. Here some examples:

<!-- page-341 -->

- "There is no truth." (Is this statement true?)
- "There are no absolutes." (Is this an absolute?)
- "No one can know any truth about religion." (And how, precisely, did you come to know that truth about religion?)
- "Talking about God is meaningless." (What does this statement about God mean?)
- "You can know truth only through experience." (What experience taught you that truth?)
- "Never take anyone's advice on that issue." (Should I take your advice on that?)<sup>51</sup>

Often these statements are made to imply that anyone who believes another to be wrong is being intolerant. When we hear someone make a statement like this, we should graciously point out the contradiction.

### Weak Slogans

Some slogans are repeated in religious conversation in order to stop Christians in their tracks. Although these slogans may be worded differently, the goal is the same: to portray Christians as intolerant, judgmental people who think they are right and everyone else is wrong. Following are some slogans along with examples of how to respond drawn from a book I strongly recommend by Paul Copan, *True for You, but Not for Me*.

**"Who are you to judge others?"** The first response when someone says this is to ask, "Is it wrong for me to judge?" If the person says yes, ask, "Is that your judgment?" Many people confuse making judgments with being judgmental. We certainly should not look down on others but rather have an attitude of humility (Gal. 6:1).<sup>52</sup> But this does not mean that we refrain from seeking the truth. Rather, as Copan reminds us, "In your interactions, remember your own sinfulness and the other's humanness—not vice versa. Speak the truth in love."<sup>53</sup>

**"That's just your opinion."** By informing us that our statement is one of opinion rather than knowledge, the person using this slogan is unwittingly claiming to *know* something true—namely, that what you are saying is *false*. Although it is certainly true that some people are not in touch with reality and their opinions ought to be taken with a grain of salt, to say, "That's just your opinion," simply does not answer the point you're making.<sup>54</sup>

**"All religions are basically the same."** Anyone who claims that all religions are basically the same has never studied what other religions teach. Copan puts it this way: "All religions

<!-- page-342 -->

are *not* basically the same. They differ profoundly, in major ways. What they have in common is that they are so different."<sup>55</sup> As we have seen throughout this volume, we do well to affirm truth wherever we find it, even if we find it in other religions. We have to be careful, of course, because when truth and error are mixed together, the result can be even bigger error. But we ought to be on the lookout for glimpses of truth where we find them—for films that display the destructive consequences of sin and the power of redemption, for example, or that lift up the value of people as God's image bearers. As Copan phrases it, "Some aspects of various religions may help pave the way to the gospel, which is the fulfillment of all religions' and philosophies' highest ideals, aspirations and hopes."<sup>56</sup>

> We ought to be on the lookout for glimpses of truth where we find them—for films that display the destructive consequences of sin and the power of redemption, for example, or that lift up the value of people as God's image bearers.

**"If you grew up in Iran, you would be a Muslim."** Many people use this argument to show that Christians are intolerant because they impose their beliefs on others and say that other religions are wrong. They will argue that what someone believes is greatly determined by where he or she is born. However, location of birth is not a determining factor of objective truth. We would not say, for example, that repressive political regimes are good because some people grow up under them. It isn't arrogant to point out that some worldviews focus more on human flourishing than others. Rather, it is arrogant to say that differences among religions are meaningless or, worse, that every viewpoint is equally focused on the good. It just isn't true.<sup>57</sup>

**"Saying Jesus is the only way to heaven is exclusive and discounts every other religion."** If something is true, it excludes contrary beliefs. The very idea that truth is exclusive does not make it false. Jesus claimed to be the only way to heaven (John 14:6),<sup>58</sup> so it is not Christians who are exclusive, it is Jesus. The only ones excluded are those who choose not to believe him and receive his offer of salvation. So when people from another religion says that Christianity discounts their explanation of life and plan of salvation, they're right. However, their religion excludes Christianity too. In fact, those who object to all religions are likewise exclusivist when they say that religious truth claims cannot be known. Everyone is exclusivist; the question is what evidence they can bring to bear to show that their exclusiveness constitutes justified true belief.

## 13. Response 2: Ask Good Questions

Francis Scott Key, the man who penned the words to "The Star-Spangled Banner," was also a Christian interested in displayed Christianity's truth. He once wrote,

> I don't believe there are any new objections to be discovered to the truth of Christianity, though there may be some art in presenting old ones in a new dress. My faith has been greatly confirmed by the infidel writers I have read. Men may argue ingeniously against our faith, as indeed they may against anything—but what can they say in defense of their own. I would carry the war into their own territories, I would ask them what they believe—if they said they believed anything, [and] I think that they might be shown

<!-- page-343 -->

> to be more full of difficulties and liable to infinitely greater objections than the system they oppose and they were credulous and unreasonable for believing it.<sup>59</sup>

Mr. Key understood a profound yet little-known principle of defending the Christian faith (1 Pet. 3:15).<sup>60</sup> It is simply this: the best defense is a good offense.

> If you find it difficult to stand up for what you believe, start by asking questions.

If you find it difficult to stand up for what you believe, start by asking questions. A few strategic questions can get your conversational partner thinking in short order. Good questions show thoughtfulness. They help us get to know others and gather information about what they believe.<sup>61</sup> Second, they compel others to think through beliefs they may have accepted without realizing it. Third, asking questions enables us to "level the playing field" and avoid sneaky argument strategies from a conversational partner. Plus, question asking is low risk. If a conversational partner gets upset, we can simply stop asking questions or change the subject. Years ago I learned a series of questions from a friend named Andrew Heister. Over time I've adapted Andrew's lengthier list into four basic questions for any conversation on just about any topic:<sup>62</sup>

**"What do you mean by \_\_\_\_\_?"** Always ask for a definition of the key terms. Arguments often employ fuzzy definitions of terms. When someone makes a truth claim, remember how Socrates, perhaps the world's most famous arguer, always required his opponents to define their terms, whether their topics were justice, the good life, or even what makes a valid argument in the first place. He understood that defining the terms is paramount to discovering the truth. For example, if someone says, "There is no God," ask, "What do you mean by God?"

**"How did you come to that conclusion?"** Always question how a particular fact came to be known. Most people miss this step because they assume that "facts" are always true. Surprisingly, most people believe things for which they have little or no evidence. Try this question out when someone expresses strong opinions, such as "Miracles are impossible" or "Christianity is for fools."

**"Where do you get your information?"** What is the source of the fact in question, and how can it be verified? Much of what passes as factual is based on dubious information or hearsay. Good facts should be backed up by citing evidence. When someone makes a difficult-to-believe claim, such as "Those who question whether global warming is human caused are victims of a conspiracy by big oil companies" or "Humans simply aren't made to be faithful to one person in marriage," ask detailed questions about how they know what they know. Before long you will get to the root of the issue and be on even terms in the discussion.

**"What happens if you are wrong?"** Most people don't like to think that they might be wrong, but it is important to understand what's at stake when we choose to believe something. It is one thing to claim a belief and yet another to stake one's life on it. The most important question that can be asked in life is "Where do you go when you die, and what happens if you are wrong?"<sup>63</sup> Of course, you must be prepared to receive this question as well as ask it. You

<!-- page-344 -->

don't have to know all the answers right now, nor should you expect others to know them. The goal is, instead, to spark conversation.

To see how these questions can work, consider the following imaginary conversation:

> Friend: "It is intolerant to think that someone can know the truth about God."
>
> You: "What do you mean by intolerant?"
>
> Friend: "Intolerance is being judgmental about what other people think and believe by saying they are wrong."
>
> You: "That is an interesting perspective. How did you come to that conclusion?"
>
> Friend: "What do you mean?"
>
> You: "Do you think it is possible to know anything about God?"
>
> Friend: "Yes, I think people can know things about God, but no one can be certain they are right."
>
> You: "Where did you get your information on that?"
>
> Friend: "My religious studies professor said that we should appreciate what every religion has to say because each religion teaches us something about God. However, no one should be too dogmatic about what they think is true."
>
> You: "So, let me see if I understand what you are saying. You believe it is wrong to tell other people they are wrong for thinking they know something about God, right? However, by saying Christians are wrong, aren't you doing the very thing you say is wrong? Aren't you saying that you know something to be true about God that Christians have missed? Isn't that being intolerant of Christians?"
>
> Friend: "Well ... I think what I am saying is different because I am accepting of all religious faiths and think they all have something to say about God."
>
> You: "Do you accept what Christians believe about God?"
>
> Friend: "No, because they think everyone else is wrong!"
>
> You: "But what happens if you are wrong about that?"

In the end, the goal of such conversations is not to play mind games or be tricky; it is to discern how what others say matches up with reality as well as help them think through their assumptions.

## 14. Response 3: Have a Good Attitude

<!-- page-345 -->

Understanding the truth isn't all we need to do. First Peter 3:15 says that we are "always being prepared to make a defense to anyone who asks you for a reason for the hope that is in you ... with gentleness and respect." We need to learn to communicate the truth in the way Jesus would. Here are some ideas about how to do it.

**Embrace humble transparency.** Humble transparency means recognizing that our understanding of the truth is valid, but that in our sin nature we lack knowledge, misunderstand things, and sometimes even use God's truth to further our own personal agendas. We see now dimly, as in a mirror (1 Cor. 13:12). This leaves room to be honest about our own struggles without being dangerously wishy-washy. Here's how to articulate it:

- "We certainly cannot know everything. But there are some things we can be sure of. Let's talk about what some of those things might be."
- "I am a fallen creature, so my ability to reason is far from perfect, but here is what I understand to be true."

Our attitude counts for a great deal in this. As the Chuck Colson Center's John Stonestreet says, "Young adults have reacted to seeing certainty with no humility by choosing humility with no certainty. We need to offer them certainty with humility."<sup>64</sup>

**Trust God's sovereignty.** Most Christians would say their spiritual growth has involved honestly wrestling with significant issues. The people we talk to about God might also need to wrestle with such issues. Trusting God means surrendering the outcome to him, walking faithfully with others, and avoiding manipulating the situation. Here's how to articulate it:

- "This is a big issue and I'm glad you're not taking it lightly. I'll pray and ask God to give you insight."
- "I'm so glad you're interested in asking the tough questions, and I hope we have the chance to talk more about this."
- "I've wrestled a lot with that issue myself. Here are some resources that I found helpful."

**Avoid indoctrinating.** My friend Ken Van Meter found through his dissertation research that people become resistant when they believe that Christianity is being forced upon them.<sup>65</sup> Therefore, we ought to give people time and intellectual space to reason things through. Here's how to articulate it:

- "If you're like me, I would guess you have genuine questions and doubts. I want to hear your honest questions."

<!-- page-346 -->

- "May I share with you how Christians throughout history have come to grips with this issue?"

**Listen in an engaged fashion.** A friend of mine once commented on why Christians need to learn how to listen: "Listening to another's beliefs before speaking makes the listener credible and compassionate. However misguided the other's beliefs may be, why should he or she listen to me if I cannot listen to them? Is my faith so small that I have to cover my ears?"

Here's how to articulate it:

- "Tell me more about that." (Nothing says, "I'm listening!" as clearly as a question that honestly solicits further communication.)
- "I want to hear what is important to you."
- "Can we take some time to share our points of view with one another?"
- "Thank you for trusting me with your thoughts on these real-life matters."

As much as we value openness and encourage conversation, we *never* want to give the impression that God's truth is up for debate. It is not. God's nature and character are revealed in Scripture, and he means for us to know what is true. John Stonestreet suggests, "Look them in the eye and say that you're willing to stand on these ideas. But when you don't know something, you have to be humble enough to say 'Good question.'"<sup>66</sup>

## 15. Conclusion

Claiming to know truth is not intolerant. It is not intolerant to say that we can have knowledge about God, just as it is not intolerant to say we can have knowledge about what we had for dinner last night or about the solar system.

> True tolerance gives people the opportunity to hold differing views and still accept each other as human beings. True *intolerance* is treating a person with disdain and disrespect because of a belief he or she holds.

True tolerance gives people the opportunity to hold differing views and still accept each other as human beings. True *intolerance* is treating a person with disdain and disrespect because of a belief he or she holds.

In the end, Christians should be able to practice tolerance of the best sort, valuing other people as human beings enough to take them seriously, asking thought-provoking questions, and together moving closer to an understanding of the truth.

There is perhaps no topic on which a compassionate and inquisitive attitude is more important than the topic we will discuss in the next chapter: why God would allow evil and suffering. People's experiences of pain are very real and their questions deserve serious answers, especially when their life experiences call into question God's goodness.

## Endnotes

1. Brian Jones, *Hell Is Real: But I Hate to Admit It* (Colorado Springs, CO: David C Cook, 2011), 141.
2. John 14:6: "Jesus said to him, 'I am the way, and the truth, and the life. No one comes to the Father except through me.'"
3. Colossians 1:16: "By him all things were created, in heaven and on earth, visible and invisible, whether thrones or dominions or rulers or authorities—all things were created through him and for him"; Hebrews 1:1–3: "Long ago, at many times and in many ways, God spoke to our fathers by the prophets, but in these last days he has spoken to us by his Son, whom he appointed the heir of all things, through whom also he created the world. He is the radiance of the glory of God and the exact imprint of his nature, and he upholds the universe by the word of his power. After making purification for sins, he sat down at the right hand of the Majesty on high"; John 1:1–3: "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. He was in the beginning with God. All things were made through him and without him was not anything made that was made."
4. J. P. Moreland and Garrett DeWeese, *Philosophy Made Slightly Less Difficult* (Downers Grove, IL: IVP Academic, 2005), 56.
5. Dallas Willard, quoted in Brad Stetson and Joseph G. Conti, *The Truth about Tolerance: Pluralism, Diversity, and the Culture Wars* (Downers Grove, IL: IVP Academic, 2005), 139.
6. Teresa Whitehurst, "The Intolerance of Christian Conservatives," *CounterPunch*, http://www.counterpunch.org/2005/01/25/the-intolerance-of-christian-conservatives/.
7. David Kinnaman and Gabe Lyons, *unChristian* (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker, 2012).
8. Romans 3:23: "All have sinned and fall short of the glory of God."
9. John 3:16: "For God so loved the world, that he gave his only Son, that whoever believes in him should not perish but have eternal life."
10. 1 John 2:2: "He is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only but also for the sins of the whole world."
11. Moreland and DeWeese, *Philosophy Made Slightly Less Difficult*, 53.
12. Edmund Husserl makes precisely this point about reality in a devastating critique of Postmodernist epistemology in *Logical Investigations*, vol. 2, trans. J. N. Findlay (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1970), 603.
13. Francis Beckwith and Gregory Koukl, *Relativism: Feet Firmly Planted in Mid-Air* (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker, 1998), 20.
14. The Barna Group regularly polls people on the question of whether there is such a thing as moral truth. See www.barna.org.
15. If you are this kind of person, please do not tell anyone you are a Christian.
16. Kai-man Kwan, professor of religion and theology at Hong Kong Baptist University, in studying verbal reports of people's conversion experiences concludes that such people are not having isolated, delusional experiences. Man-Kwan says religious experiences can be studied for their validity if they are (1) shared experiences that happen over and over again, across cultures and time, (2) common in their ontology in that the experiences reported by people occur around certain things, processes or properties, and (3) conceptually coherent in that they are describable in a coherent way. See Kai-man Kwan, "The Argument from Religious Experience," in *The Blackwell Companion to Natural Theology*, ed. William Lane Craig and J. P. Moreland (Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell), 511.
17. This claim may seem grand, but there is voluminous evidence for it. I suggest consulting books written by reputable scholars such as David Bentley Hart, *Atheist Delusions: The Christian Revolution and Its Fashionable Enemies* (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2010) and Rodney Stark, *Cities of God: The Real Story of How Christianity Became an Urban Movement and Conquered Rome* (New York: HarperOne, 2007).
18. The simplest theory, according to Richard Swinburne, professor emeritus at Oxford University, is the one most likely to be correct. Richard Swinburne, *The Evolution of the Soul* (Oxford: Clarendon, 1986), 13–15, quoted in Kwan, "The Argument from Religious Experience," 508.
19. C. D. Broad, *Religion, Philosophy and Psychical Research* (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1953), 197, quoted in Kwan, "The Argument from Religious Experience," 502.
20. Alvin Plantinga, "Pluralism: A Defense of Religious Exclusivism," *The Philosophical Challenge of Religious Diversity*, ed. Kevin Meeker and Philip Quinn (New York: Oxford University Press, 1999), 172–92.
21. Francis Beckwith and Greg Koukl put it this way: "My statement about Häagen-Dazs ice cream is subjective truth. It is true for me, the subject, but not for the object, the ice cream itself. The ice cream doesn't taste; I taste it. The experience of flavor pertains to me as a subject, not to the ice cream as an object. Tastes are personal. They're private. They're individual." Beckwith and Koukl, *Relativism*, 27.
22. Norman Geisler and Joseph Holden, *Living Loud: Defending Your Faith* (Nashville: Broadman, Holman, 2002), 29.
23. James Sire, *Naming the Elephant: Worldview as a Concept* (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity, 2004), 20.
24. Philosophers J. P. Moreland and Garrett DeWeese provide us with a definition of the law of noncontradiction: "For any property F, nothing can be both F and not-F at the same time in the same way." Something cannot be both true and false at the same time. For example, if someone looked at an apple and said the apple is red, then looked at the same apple and said the apple is not red, this person is contradicting himself. However, if he judged the apple to be green and then later judged it to be red, he would not necessarily be contradicting himself because the apple might not have fully ripened and still had a green coloring to it when viewed earlier. See Moreland and DeWeese, *Philosophy Made Slightly Less Difficult*, 13.
25. Moreland and DeWeese, *Philosophy Made Slightly Less Difficult*, 54.
26. In other places, we go into more detail about tests for truth and how the Christian worldview meets them. Understanding Christian truth is not just about understanding what is true with our minds (Romans 12:2: "be transformed by the renewal of your mind") as well as with our hearts (Hebrews 4:12: "The word of God is ... discerning the thoughts and intentions of the heart"). W. Gary Phillips, William E. Brown, and John Stonestreet expand on the correspondence criterion for truth and suggest a four-part test: (1) test of reason: Is it reasonable? Can it be logically stated and defended? (2) test of the outer world: Is there some external, corroborating evidence to support it? (3) test of the inner world: Does it adequately address the "victories, disappointments, blessings, crises, and relationships of our everyday world"? (4) test of the real world: Are its consequences good or bad when applied in any given cultural context? See chapter 3, "Putting Worldviews to the Test," 61–90.
27. Francis A. Schaeffer, *How Should We Then Live?* (Old Tappan, NJ: Revell, 1976), 145.
28. C. S. Lewis, *The Abolition of Man* (New York: Macmillan, 1973), 78.
29. In this particular list, Richard Beis includes incest prohibition within nuclear family, prohibition of rape, some form of marriage demanded, prohibition of adultery (with only a few strictly limited legal exceptions), opposition to promiscuity in the sense of having a large number of partners, lifelong union of the spouses is the ideal, exogamy (marriage outside the family) as a further determination of the incest rule, and disrespect for illegitimate children. By this last point, Beis does not mean a disrespectful attitude toward such children but rather a society-wide recognition that birth in such circumstances is less than ideal.
30. Richard H. Beis, "Some Contributions of Anthropology to Ethics," *The Thomist* 27, no. 2 (April 1964): 174–223, quoted in William D. Gairdner, *The Book of Absolutes* (Montreal: McGill-Queen's University Press, 2008), 198–200.
31. James Burke, *The Day the Universe Changed* (Boston: Little, Brown, 1985), 337.
32. Erich Fromm, *You Shall Be as Gods* (New York: Rinehart and Winston, 1966), 88.
33. Denis Diderot, quoted in "Diderot, Denis (1713–1784)," *The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism*, ed. Ronald Hamowy (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 2008), 125.
34. V. I. Lenin, *Selected Works* (New York: International Publishers, 1938), 15: 402.
35. Lenin, *Selected Works*, 15: 405.
36. Lenin, *Selected Works*, 10: 86.
37. Lenin, *Selected Works*, 35: 122.
38. Edward O. Wilson "The Relation of Science to Theology," *Zygon* 15, no. 4 (1980): 433.
39. Sidney Hook, *Religion in a Free Society* (Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press, 1967), 36.
40. Marilyn Ferguson, *The Aquarian Conspiracy* (Los Angeles: J. P. Tarcher, 1980), 383.
41. Eckhart Tolle, *A New Earth* (New York: Plume, 2005): 71.
42. Neale Donald Walsch, *The New Revelations: A Conversation with God* (New York: Artia Books, 2002), 97.
43. "Bill Moyers, 'Of Myth and Men: A Conversation between Bill Moyers and George Lucas on the Meaning of the Force and the True Theology of Star Wars,'" *Time*, April 26, 1999, 92.
44. George Barna, *Third Millennium Teens* (Ventura, CA: Barna Research Group, 1999), 48. It should be noted that of the teenagers surveyed, 70 percent were active in a church youth group and 82 percent identified themselves as Christians.
45. Stetson and Conti, *The Truth about Tolerance*, 11.
46. Quoted in J. Warner Wallace, "Is Christianity Intolerant?" http://coldcasechristianity.com/2015/is-christianity-intolerant/.
47. Wallace, "Is Christianity Intolerant?" (emphasis in the original).
48. Paul Copan, *True for You, but Not for Me* (Minneapolis: Bethany, 2009), 45.
49. Galatians 5:19–21: "The works of the flesh are evident: sexual immorality, impurity, sensuality, idolatry, sorcery, enmity, strife, jealousy, fits of anger, rivalries, dissensions, divisions, envy, drunkenness, orgies, and things like these. I warn you, as I warned you before, that those who do such things will not inherit the kingdom of God."
50. J. Budziszewski, *True Tolerance: Liberalism and the Necessity of Judgment* (New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 2000), xi.
51. Greg Koukl, *Tactics: A Game Plan for Discussing Your Christian Convictions* (Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2009), 108.
52. Galatians 6:1: "Brothers, if anyone is caught in any transgression, you who are spiritual should restore him in a spirit of gentleness. Keep watch on yourself, lest you too be tempted."
53. Copan, *True for You, but Not for Me*, 43.
54. Copan, *True for You, but Not for Me*, 60.
55. Copan, *True for You, but Not for Me*, 118.
56. Copan, *True for You, but Not for Me*, 118.
57. Copan, *True for You, but Not for Me*, 135.
58. John 14:6: "Jesus said to him, 'I am the way, and the truth, and the life. No one comes to the Father except through me.'"
59. Hugh A. Garland, quoting Francis Scott Key letter to John Randolph, January 20, 1814, in *Life of John Randolph of Roanoke* (New York: D. Appleton, 1874), 30.
60. 1 Peter 3:15: "In your hearts honor Christ the Lord as holy, always being prepared to make a defense to anyone who asks you for a reason for the hope that is in you; yet do it with gentleness and respect."
61. Recall the Bible story of Jesus's visiting the temple as a twelve-year-old boy. The Bible says his parents found him asking questions of the religious leaders (Luke 2:41–52). In the Hebrew culture, asking intelligent questions showed that one understood the issues at stake.
62. My friend Bill Jack has created a similar list of questions, which he illustrates by asking them of people who hold different worldviews. His filmed interactions are compiled in a clever video titled *Simple Tools for Brain Surgery*. If you find it difficult to stand up for what you believe, start by asking questions.
63. Be warned: this question often draws a strong response. The anti-theist author Richard Dawkins once was asked this question in a public forum. How he responded comprises one of his most viewed videos on YouTube: www.youtube.com /watch?v=6mmskXXetcg. Unfortunately, because it was a public forum, Dawkins's response could not be easily debated. But note that rather than answering the question, he deflected it by creating imaginary views that people could not hold with good reasons and then mocking them. This is called the Straw Man fallacy.
64. John Stonestreet, interview with the author, October 21, 2009.
65. Kenneth G. Van Meter, "The Order of Importance of Component Parts of the Biblical Worldview in Christian High School Students," (dissertation, George Fox University School of Education, 2009).
66. Stonestreet, interview with the author.
