<!-- page-351 -->
# Chapter 14: Why Is There Evil and Suffering?

## 1. The World Is a Mess

For many people, the existence of evil poses a problem for belief in a good God. In his book *The Innocence of God*, Christian author Udo Middelmann states the problem frankly: "Reality is such a mess. If there is a God in charge of this, God should be held accountable for a monstrous experience....

<!-- page-352 -->

Someone in heaven must be behind all this, in the same way that there was always some evil ruler behind everything bad on earth."<sup>1</sup>

Not only does **evil** exist, it's everywhere. It trickles and soaks and floods into every aspect of our existence like nuclear waste from a burst storage container, contaminating everything in its wake. Can't God stop it? If he can't, is he truly as powerful as the Bible claims he is? If he *can* but doesn't, what kind of God is he?

> **Evil:** that which deviates from good; the privation of good.

> **Good:** that which embodies or reflects God's original design.

It seems that the only way to approach this question, as difficult as it is, is to begin with clear, biblical definitions of good and evil. **Good** is the way things ought to be; **evil** is what deviates from the good. Evil is not a "thing" in itself, the early Christian philosopher Augustine of Hippo explained; rather, it exists *in* things as a corruption or a cancer. As we saw in chapters 5 and 6, evil cannot exist unless that which is good has an actual essence or substance that can be corrupted, starved, sucked dry, or abused.<sup>2</sup>

> **Suffering:** pain or discomfort that results from such things as disease, injury, oppression, fatigue, old age, loneliness, and betrayal.

**Suffering** is pain or discomfort "that results from disease, injury, oppression, overwork, old age, sorrow for one's sins, disappointment with oneself or with one's lot in life (or that of persons close to one), the pain of loneliness, isolation, betrayal, unrequited love, and awareness of the suffering of others."<sup>3</sup>

> **Moral Evil:** evil brought about by the actions of human beings (for example, rape, murder, and genocide).

Evil seems to be of two sorts. First, there is human-caused evil, or **moral evil**. Moral evil is committed by people, so it is hard to fully blame God. Still, couldn't God do at least *something* to alleviate the pain? Couldn't he step in and stop the really bad people from doing the worst evil? Why didn't he stop Hitler or a shooter who kills children at school, for example?

> **Natural Evil:** evil brought about by acts of nature, such as fires, earthquakes, and diseases.

The second kind of evil is **natural evil**, which includes fires, floods, earthquakes, tsunamis, animal attacks, and anything that results from nature and causes pain and death. In Colorado Springs, Colorado, very near to where the publisher of this book is headquartered, massive wildfires in the summers of 2012 and 2013 scorched thousands of acres of spectacular mountain vistas. Even worse, the firestorms destroyed the homes and earthly possessions of hundreds of people.

And that wasn't the end of it. The burn from one of the fires left a scar that does not absorb water. Now when it rains, millions of gallons of water rush down the mountainside creating terror and destruction. Lives have been snuffed out, property has been destroyed, businesses built over a lifetime ruined. And the floods will continue for a decade, residents are told, until new plants grow and the soil can absorb water again. Meanwhile, the burn scar stands as a silent reminder of how little control we have over nature.

Compared to other natural disasters around the world, what we faced in Colorado was minor. Each year disasters around the world disrupt the lives of tens of millions of people and

<!-- page-353 -->

claim tens of thousands of lives.<sup>4</sup> This raises perplexing questions. Why doesn't God protect people from disasters they have no control over? Why does he allow suffering to multiply through drought, disease, flood, and fire?

In this chapter, we'll see that although we don't have a God's-eye view of the universe and therefore cannot know all the answers, only a biblical worldview truly grapples with evil and suffering. It offers a coherent view of the past, meaning to the present, and hope for the future. In the end, the cross of Jesus Christ stands as God's ultimate answer to the problem of evil, offering hope for redemption and restoration.

Obviously, not everyone embraces a biblical worldview. As we will see, this does not exempt them from having to explain evil and suffering.

## 2. Everyone Has a "Problem of Evil"

Many who reject Christianity—and even God's existence—because of the problem of evil overlook something very important: by rejecting one worldview, they must embrace another, and that new worldview must deal with evil and suffering as well. Because evil exists, every worldview must explain it. Do other worldviews offer more rationally or emotionally satisfying solutions? Let's look at how several address this issue.

### How Atheists and Naturalists Deal with the Problem of Evil

Atheism (the belief that there is no God) and naturalism (the belief that everything can be explained through natural processes) contend that the problem of evil is that we have a problem *with* evil. Because there is no higher cause or plan, life is tough and bad things happen. That's just the way it is, according to these worldviews. As Richard Dawkins coldly states,

> In a universe of blind physical forces and genetic replication some people are going to get hurt, other people are going to get lucky, and you won't find any rhyme or reason in it, nor any justice. The universe we observe has precisely the properties we should expect if there is, at the bottom, no design, no purpose, no evil and no other good. Nothing but blind pitiless indifference. DNA neither knows nor cares. DNA just is. And we dance to its music.<sup>5</sup>

As Dawkins sees it, there is no higher meaning. Life is painful; then you die. Deal with it. Some think that if evil just is and there is no way to explain it, then the problem of evil vanishes. Not so. The problem of evil isn't merely that it exists but rather that we *know* it exists and recognize it as evil. If the atheist and naturalist story of the world is true, where did the idea of evil come from in the first place? This dilemma was, according to C. S. Lewis, what led him to reject his atheism:

> My argument against God was that the universe seemed so cruel and unjust. But how had I got this idea of just and unjust? A man does not call a line crooked unless he has some idea of a straight line.... Of course I could have given up my idea of justice by saying it was nothing but a private idea of my own. But if I did that, then

<!-- page-354 -->

> my argument against God collapsed too—for the argument depended on saying the world was really unjust, not simply that it did not happen to please my fancies. Thus, in the very act of trying to prove that God did not exist—in other words, that the whole of reality was senseless—I found I was forced to assume that one part of reality—namely my idea of justice—was full of sense. If the whole universe has no meaning, we should never have found out that it has no meaning: just as, if there were no light in the universe and therefore no creatures with eyes, we should never have known it was dark. Dark would be without meaning.<sup>6</sup>

We humans sense evil because we sense that good has been violated. As Douglas Groothuis says, "In order for objective evil to exist, objective goodness must exist as well, and good must exist in a more fundamental way."<sup>7</sup> Just as we can know we are sick because we know what it means to be healthy, we can see evil at work because we have some sense of the good corrupted by it.

Of course, not all atheists and naturalists detach themselves from the problem of evil in a Dawkins-like fashion. Many truly want life to be more comfortable for themselves and others, and they genuinely believe that human reasoning can minimize suffering—that the world can be made a better place. Yet if we become obsessive about minimizing suffering through reasoning, we can short-circuit our experience of a fully meaningful life. Psychologist Paul Vitz calls the attempt to minimize suffering at all costs "selfist" psychology that "trivializes life by claiming that suffering (and by implication even death) is without intrinsic meaning. Suffering is seen as some sort of absurdity, usually a man-made mistake which could have been avoided by the use of knowledge to gain control of the environment."<sup>8</sup> In the end, you either laugh or cry, so you might as well laugh, like Sisyphus in the ancient Greek myth, who laughed at the gods while carrying out his absurd sentence (pushing a boulder up a hill each day and having it roll back down again, for all of eternity).

Yet even if this psychological approach *did* make suffering more meaningful, it is still an unsatisfactory solution. As professor William Kirk Kilpatrick points out,

> What good does it do to the billions who have already passed through this life in wretchedness, that scientific humanism will one day create a world without suffering? For that matter what good does it do to those who are right now dying miserable and lonely deaths all over the world? All that a strict humanism has to say to most of the human race living and dead is "Too bad you were born too early," and "Too bad about your suffering." The bulk of the world's pain is written off as a bad expense.<sup>9</sup>

In the end, the atheist and naturalistic response to evil amounts to little more than feathering the nest, adding a bit of comfort here and there, numbing the pain. The "why" question, though, still goes unanswered, perhaps even unasked.

### How Marxists Deal with the Problem of Evil

Marxism marries atheist and naturalist assumptions to revolutionary class struggle, and it is a worldview dominating political life for roughly 20 percent of the world's population.<sup>10</sup> As the

<!-- page-355 -->

founder of the Soviet Union, Vladimir Lenin, put it, "According to the theory of **socialism**, i.e., of Marxism ... the real driving force of history is the revolutionary class struggle."<sup>11</sup> Evil is human caused, Marxists believe, and the responsible party is the **bourgeoisie** (pronounced booze-wah-ZEE), the business owners. These people must be overthrown by the **proletariat**, the working class. As Marx phrased it in *The Communist Manifesto*, the communists' ends "can be attained only by the forcible overthrow of all existing social conditions.... The proletarians have nothing to lose but their chains. They have a world to win. Proletarians of all countries, unite!"<sup>12</sup>

> **Socialism:** an economic system based on governmental or communal ownership of the means of production and distribution of goods and services.

> **Bourgeoisie:** a term used in Marxist theory to describe those who own the means of production.

> **Proletariat:** a term used in Marxist theory to describe the working-class wage earners who do not own the means of production.

To Marx, the workers were cleansed of evil through their hard work. Stop the domination of the bourgeoisie, and most evil goes away. Of course the bourgeoisie class presumably includes those who embrace the supernatural because they encourage the proletariat to drown its terrible economic plight in the "spiritual booze" of a mythical heaven rather than rising up against their oppression.<sup>13</sup> The God-intoxicated make lousy revolutionaries. Unless they are cut off from God, they'll never sober up enough to revolt, and humanity's chance of creating a human-centered heaven on earth will be ruined.

But by denying the evil in the hearts of the workers, Marxism made things worse. Infinitely so. In their revolutionary zeal, Marxists discounted the suffering of the business owners, the wealthy, and the religious leaders as necessary bloodletting for their cause. Eventually those who "resisted" Marxism, even the workers who were supposedly cleansed of evil through their work, became victims as well. Political scientist R. J. Rummel estimates that Marx's ideas led to the deaths of about 110 million people in the twentieth century.<sup>14</sup> Marxism became one of history's greatest sources of human-caused evil. In a sad irony, Marxist countries ended up destroying the people they set out to save: the working class.

In universities today, Marx's ideas have spread beyond economics to literature, sociology, and philosophy. Neo-Marxists teach that those in power always manage government and culture in a way that serves their own interests and marginalizes others. Evil is whatever those in power do; good is whatever those who neo-Marxists judge to be the oppressed do.

### How Eastern Religions and New Spiritualists Deal with the Problem of Evil

Eastern religions (such as Buddhism, Hinduism, Taoism, Shinto, and Confucianism) share basic worldview beliefs with their Western counterparts (such as New Age thought, **Wicca**, neopaganism, and Scientology). Together, we can group them under the heading of

> **Wicca:** a neopagan, religious form of witchcraft.

<!-- page-356 -->

**New Spirituality**, primarily because of their belief in **pantheism** (from two Greek words, *pan*, which means "all," and *theos*, which means "god"). All is god. All reality is one thing, and that thing is spiritual, not physical. The physical world is an illusion. Evil or any kind of physical suffering is also, therefore, an illusion. It doesn't actually exist.<sup>15</sup>

> **New Spirituality:** a pantheistic worldview that teaches that everything and everyone are connected through divine consciousness.

> **Pantheism:** the belief that everything in the universe is ultimately divine.

The idea that evil doesn't exist seems baffling to those who see evil and suffering as a universal aspect of the human experience. Haven't humans all over the world and throughout all of history suffered? What are we to do with this? In the Eastern world, it's really not much of an issue. The *Bhagavad Gita*—a treasured section of the *Mahabharata*, India's national epic poem—has Lord Krishna responding to Arjuna's grief by saying,

> Although you mean well, Arjuna,
> Your sorrow is sheer delusion.
> Wise men do not grieve
> For the dead or for the living.<sup>16</sup>

If sorrow over pain and suffering is delusional, the antidote is to stop grieving. Krishna's statement represents the general tenor of Hindu writing on evil and suffering, though Hinduism is a very diverse religion and not all Hindus hold this view of suffering.<sup>17</sup>

Among most who follow Hindu tradition, though, compassion toward the suffering is explicitly frowned upon. Whole classes of "untouchables" are ignored by those who believe that alleviating suffering is wrong because it cuts short the atonement for the sins of past lives. It was not devout Hindus but devout Christians such as Mother Teresa and the Sisters of Charity who sought to alleviate suffering as a way of displaying Christ's love, offering a warm heart rather than a cold shoulder.

Buddhism's approach to suffering runs along a parallel path. Finding an end to suffering is the whole point of Buddha's teaching.<sup>18</sup> In his first sermon, Buddha outlined several different kinds of suffering, including birth, aging, sickness, death, sorrow, pain, grief, and despair. The cause of this suffering, he said, was attachment. We are like a monkey who finds himself captured because he refuses to let go of the treat that is holding his hand inside a trap. Releasing attachment is the only way to be free. The end of suffering, Buddha said, is "the complete cessation of that very thirst, giving it up, renouncing it, emancipating oneself from it, detaching oneself from it."<sup>19</sup>

> **New Spirituality:** a pantheistic worldview that teaches that everything and everyone are connected through divine consciousness.

So in the Hindu and Buddhist traditions, the right response to suffering is not to sympathize with a person experiencing it but to remind that person that sorrow over suffering is delusional. Rather than grieve, the individual ought to let go of the attachment that causes the suffering in the first place.

<!-- page-357 -->

In contrast to their Eastern counterparts, Western pantheists of the New Spiritualist mold tend to focus on the pursuit of health and success. Sickness and disease occur because people are not sufficiently in tune with what pantheists call the **higher consciousness**. Bestselling New Spiritualist author Marilyn Ferguson explains, "Health and disease don't just happen to us. They are active processes issuing from inner harmony or disharmony, profoundly affected by our states of consciousness, our ability or inability to flow with experience."<sup>20</sup>

> **Higher Consciousness:** the supposed state of awareness wherein individuals realize their divinity and the divine interconnectedness of all things.

> **Karma:** a concept found in Eastern religions that states that good is returned to those who do good, and evil is returned to those who do evil (either in this life or the next).

To Shakti Gawain, another New Spiritualist writer, we experience pain because we don't trust ourselves to overcome it: "Every time you don't trust yourself and don't follow your inner truth, you decrease your aliveness and your body will reflect this with a loss of vitality, numbness, pain, and eventually, physical disease."<sup>21</sup>

The Western version of New Spirituality—that evil is an illusion we permit into our lives by not properly pursuing our interests—still doesn't answer the question, "Why evil?" Rather, it makes people wonder, *If evil is an illusion, why does it seem so real?*

For the Eastern version of New Spirituality, based on the twin ideas of **karma** and **reincarnation**, the evil we experience is payback for things we did in previous lives. This is unsatisfying as well. Think of a child suffering from disease. Think of a beloved grandparent getting cancer. Think of the victims of sex trafficking who are condemned to misery for the transitory pleasure of those who overpower them. According to Douglas Groothuis, the doctrines of reincarnation and karma do not really solve the problem of evil because they cannot explain the *reality* of evil. "One of the engines of the problem of evil is innocent suffering," he says. "This is a vexing conundrum for any worldview, but karma does nothing to solve or alleviate it. According to karma, there is no unjust suffering. Everyone gets what he or she deserves, even supposedly innocent children."<sup>22</sup>

> **Reincarnation:** the belief that after biological death, the soul is reborn in a new body—either animal, human, or spirit—to continue its quest for enlightenment.

### How Muslims Deal with the Problem of Evil

> **Islam:** a theistic worldview centered on the life of the prophet Muhammad that derives its understanding of the world through the teachings of the Quran, Hadith, and *Sunnah*.

Of the major worldviews, Islam's approach to dealing with evil is closest to Christianity's. Yet, though Islam and Christianity (along with Judaism) share a belief in one God, there are major differences between Islam's and Christianity's approaches. **Islam** is Arabic for "submission." As a religion, Islam focuses on obedience to God and complete submission to him. "Such a life of obedience brings peace of the heart and establishes real peace in society at large," writes Khurshid Ahmad.<sup>23</sup>

<!-- page-358 -->

Muslims acknowledge humans as rulers over the earth but reject the *imago Dei* ("image of God"), seeing humans instead as slaves of God rather than as his image bearers.<sup>24</sup> The difference between the Christian and Muslim views on this point affects how Muslims deal with the problem of evil. As Udo Middelmann observes, Islam requires the "unquestioning submission to and acceptance of a ... divine destiny."<sup>25</sup>

To Muslims, why evil exists is the wrong question. God need not explain himself; humans must simply obey, and in so doing they will find meaning in life and peace in death.<sup>26</sup> So in the end, Islam's answer to the problem of evil is unsatisfactory as well. If God causes it, and we can never really know why, the only real answer to the question of "Why evil?" is to stop asking the question.

Obviously, there are dozens of religious perspectives in the world. We've surveyed a few of the biggies and found that they offer little in actually addressing the questions of evil and suffering. For atheists and naturalists, it is a meaningless question. For Marxists, evil results from economic conditions and can be atoned for only by inflicting vengeance on the rich. In the case of Eastern religions and New Spirituality, evil is an illusion and should thus be ignored. To Muslims, asking why evil occurs is disrespectful to God.<sup>27</sup>

None of these views explains why evil feels wrong or why we feel compelled to do something about it.

But even if other worldviews do not have a sufficient answer to the problem of evil, this does not mean that Christianity "wins" by default. Christians must still grapple with the problem, both rationally and personally. Let's start with the rational aspect.

## 3. Dealing with Evil Rationally

Sean McDowell and Jonathan Morrow aptly summarize the problem of evil from an intellectual standpoint: "When you encounter the vast literature on evil, two intellectual problems of evil emerge. First, it seems logically contradictory for a good God and evil to coexist, and second, given the magnitude, duration, and intensity of evil in the world, it is highly improbable that God exists."<sup>28</sup> If God is really good, then he would abolish evil—unless he is incapable of doing so. Thus, either God is not good or he is not powerful. You can't have it both ways, at least according to the popular argument.

It will take some time and patience to delve into the rational arguments about what evil is, how it came into existence, and how theologians in the past have explained a biblical approach to it. But it's worth it. Along the way, we'll discover that the Christian answer to the problem of evil not only explains the past but also gives meaning to the present and hope for the future.

### The Christian Answer to the Problem of Evil Explains the Past

**What is evil, anyway?** Maybe you've seen a fallen tree with a rotten core or a car rusted out from underneath. Without the tree, there would be no rot. Without the car, there would be no rust. As we saw earlier in this volume, evil is like that rot and rust: it exists only by attacking that which is whole.

Most people have no problem seeing human-caused evil as a result of sin. We've seen married people who were blissfully happy at their wedding fall into a pattern of abuse or unfaithfulness.

<!-- page-359 -->

The destructive actions of a married couple (or the corrective actions they neglect) cause emotional and physical pain, sadness, and fear. Sin is, as author Cornelius Plantinga bluntly puts it, "a parasite, a vandal, a spoiler" and a "ludicrous caricature of a genuine human life."<sup>29</sup>

Theologically speaking, evil is the loss of **shalom**. As we saw in our earlier chapter on the metanarrative of Scripture, *shalom* is a Hebrew word describing peace with God, peace from war, and peace with one's neighbors. To wish another person *shalom* is to wish that person completeness, safety, wellness, prosperity, tranquility, contentment, and friendship.

> **Shalom:** from the Hebrew for "peace, prosperity, and wellness"; implies harmony in creation and with one's neighbors as well as a right relationship with God.

God originally created human beings in a state of *shalom*. Their existence was one of wholeness in their relationship with God, with each other, and with creation. In the fall, each of these relationships was ruptured. We now live in a world that is truly not the way it's supposed to be.<sup>30</sup>

We read in chapters 5 and 6 that the flow of history is the process of God setting things to rights. At the very heart of the Christian gospel is a God, rich in grace, dealing with evil and suffering *personally*. God's answer to the problem of evil is not as much a set of logically stated answers as it is a life offered up in our place. Hebrews 4:15 says, "We do not have a high priest who is unable to sympathize with our weaknesses, but one who in every respect has been tempted as we are, yet without sin." Christ came to be with us, to suffer with us, and to accept the brunt of evil on our behalf.

**Where did evil come from?** One key biblical question is "Where did evil come from?" Did God make it? If so, isn't that an evil thing to do, sort of like Dr. Frankenstein creating a monster and unleashing it on the world? It's a simple question of negligence, and God ought to take responsibility. And if God did *not* make evil but permitted it to exist, isn't that a sign of weakness? Neither of these options is good. It appears, at first glance at least, that either God is sadistic and likes to see us suffer or he's a hapless bumbler who pushed over a cosmic domino and set the universe to tumbling.

As is often the case, though, what we see at first glance is not the whole story. To understand this, we need to look at how sin actually entered the universe and what happened as a result. Though the Bible is not explicitly clear on this, there are good reasons to think that sin got "kicked off" when an archangel named Lucifer (Satan) tried to overthrow God.<sup>31</sup> Satan then inhabited a serpent in the garden of Eden and tempted Adam and the woman, Eve, to sin (Gen. 3). In Revelation 12:9<sup>32</sup> and 20:2,<sup>33</sup> this "ancient serpent" is described as "the devil and Satan." So how could a creature such as Satan fall into sin and cause humanity to fall in his wake? Perhaps, as Norman Geisler suggests, no one caused Lucifer to sin: he caused his own sin.<sup>34</sup>

**Did God create evil?** As we will see shortly, by creating free creatures, God made evil possible. These creatures chose either to withhold good or act contrary to it, thus taking potential evil and making it actual.<sup>35</sup> For example, if God makes a world with stones in it, people might pick up some of those stones and fling them at one another. The potential evil of having stones as a part of the material world becomes actual evil when misused.

<!-- page-360 -->

But if God is all-knowing, would he not have stopped this process before it got out of control? To answer this we must clearly understand what it means for God to be all-knowing. As we saw earlier in this volume, the word **omniscient** is used to describe God's all-knowingness. God knows everything possible and actual. He possesses complete knowledge of the past, present, and future.<sup>36</sup> Knowing all truths and believing no falsehoods, he is perfect in knowledge. We see this throughout Scripture, such as in Romans 11:33: "Oh, the depth of the riches and wisdom and knowledge of God!" As Gordon Lewis puts it, "God's intellectual capabilities are unlimited, and God uses them fully and perfectly."<sup>37</sup>

> **Omniscient:** God's unique ability to know everything that can be known.

> **Sovereign:** possessing supreme authority.

We humans, on the other hand, are severely limited. We cannot see the full scope of history or figure out the relationship between people and events in the past and in the future. God has no such limitation. Hebrews 4:13 says, "No creature is hidden from his sight, but all are naked and exposed to the eyes of him to whom we must give account."

To say God is **sovereign**, though, is not to say that he maintains *absolute* control, as an engineer running a machine seeks to do. Rather, he is the *ruler* of the universe. He is in charge and has created a world of laws in which we can act in a meaningful way.<sup>38</sup>

> **Middle Knowledge (aka Molinism):** first proposed by the Jesuit priest Luis de Molina; the belief that God knows all future contingent possibilities and that through his omniscience can accomplish his divine will through the lives of free human beings.

> **Divine Determinism:** the belief that God directly determines and causes every single action in the universe.

> **Open Theism:** the belief that God does not have divine foreknowledge but that through his omniscience is able to deduce the most probabilistic future.

Philosopher William Lane Craig wrote an entire book about God's knowledge titled *Divine Foreknowledge and Human Freedom*.<sup>39</sup> In it, Craig argues for a position called **Molinism**, which was first articulated by a Jesuit priest named Luis de Molina (AD 1535–1600). Molina proposed a **middle knowledge** view of God that avoided the idea that God directly causes every single action in the universe (**divine determinism**) and also its opposite extreme, **Open Theism**—that although God is knowledgeable enough to make very accurate guesses about what will or won't happen in the future, he does not know with certainty.

What makes the problem of "what God knew and when he knew it" especially sticky is that some Christians hold such a strong view of God's sovereignty that there is little to distinguish it from the Muslim perspective that everything that happens comes into being from *God's* will, not ours.<sup>40</sup> However, if we recognize a difference between what God is *capable* of doing and what he *chooses* to do, we can see that the Christian perspective on God is quite different from the Muslim perspective. As R. C. Sproul, a well-known Reformed theologian, writes in

<!-- page-361 -->

reference to sin coming into the world, "[God] ordained the Fall in the sense that he chose to allow it, but not in the sense that he chose to coerce it."<sup>41</sup>

Here is how Craig frames the middle knowledge view of God. Because God knows all things, he knows the choices free creatures make under every possible circumstance. And yet he still leaves them free to make those choices. As we make choices, God knows what will happen as a result and is working things out so that when we arrive at the place where our free choices take us, we will see that he has worked in such a way that his good, desired end is achieved.<sup>42</sup>

A biblical example of this is when Jesus replied to Peter's boast about his loyalty. "Truly, I tell you, this very night, before the rooster crows, you will deny me three times" (Matt. 26:34). Peter then did just as Jesus had said. But that is not the end of the story. After his resurrection, Jesus forgave Peter in a tender exchange and recommissioned him for faithful service (John 21:15–17).<sup>43</sup>

Jesus knew ahead of time what Peter would do, yet he permitted him to do it and forgave him once it was done. He even gave Peter the opportunity to affirm his love for Jesus three times, just as he had denied it three times. So why, if Jesus knew that Peter would deny him, did he not stop it? Because a Peter who had fallen and been redeemed was a better Peter than the one whose bravado had gotten him into so much trouble beforehand. Indeed, perhaps all creation is this way: it is better to be redeemed than to have never fallen.

> **Free Will Defense:** an argument developed by Alvin Plantinga that contends there is no logical contradiction between the coexistence of evil and God because it is at least possible that evil exists because even an omniscient deity could not create a world in which human beings simultaneously possess free will yet never choose to do evil.

**Is evil necessary?** If we program a computer to say, "I love you," we know it isn't real love. The computer is just doing what it is told to do. But God did not create humans to be computers. We can be truly loving only by choosing to love. And in order to choose to love, we must be free to reject love and choose hate.

To explain the relationship of freedom and evil, Christian philosopher Alvin Plantinga articulated what has been called the **free will defense**. It goes like this:

> A world containing creatures who are significantly free (and freely perform more good than evil actions) is more valuable, all else being equal, than a world containing no free creatures at all. Now God can create free creatures, but He can't cause or determine them to do only what is right. For if He does so, then they aren't significantly free after all; and they do not do what is right freely. To create creatures capable of moral good, therefore, He must create creatures capable of moral evil; and He can't give these creatures the freedom to perform evil and at the same time prevent them from doing so. As it turned out, sadly enough, some of the free creatures God created went wrong in the exercise of their freedom; this is the source of moral evil. The fact that free creatures sometimes go wrong, however, counts neither against God's

<!-- page-362 -->

> omnipotence nor against His goodness; for He could have forestalled the occurrence of moral evil only by removing the possibility of moral good.<sup>44</sup>

A key phrase is "He can't give these creatures the freedom to perform evil and at the same time prevent them from doing so." The freedom to choose good, therefore, entails the freedom to choose evil. Unfortunately, many make that choice or back into it by neglecting what is good.<sup>45</sup>

But wouldn't it be possible for God just to say, "Enough!" and put a stop to the bad things that happen? On this point, author Mark Mittelberg muses,

> When I hear someone say this, I like to ask them which freedoms they think God ought to take away from us right now. Usually people get a bit more reflective when they realize that "stopping all the evil" in this fallen, sinful world would entail taking away our human liberty as well as stopping all of us in our tracks—the people who to one degree or another are right now actively participating in that evil that "must be stopped."<sup>46</sup>

We may hate the painful effects of our actions, Mittelberg points out, but we humans continue to take the freedom-abusing actions that bring them about.

We've just taken a look at what evil is, how it came to be, whether God created it, and how it is necessary for the human freedom that allows us to genuinely love and serve. The biblical view of evil makes sense of the past, but it also, as we will see, gives meaning to the present.

### The Christian Answer to the Problem of Evil Makes Sense of the Present

Those who reflect even briefly on the problem of evil can see how pointless it seems that evil and suffering exist. Although other worldviews say evil is a meaningless concept or an illusion or that it is disobedience to God to ask the question in the first place, the biblical worldview of the problem of evil helps us make sense of our lives right now. Let's examine this issue theologically, considering our own limited perspective and God's unlimited perspective. Let's also consider that in spite of the pain we experience, this is the best possible world, and then let's ask what we humans ought to be doing about evil.

> Let's consider that in spite of the pain we experience, this is the best possible world, and then let's ask what we humans ought to be doing about evil.

**God is purposeful and unlimited in understanding.** Our perspective of the world and everything in it is quite limited. I cannot know what is going on at any moment outside my own sphere of influence. Even *within* that sphere, I have little ability to make things go my way. I cannot know the future and how the various people yet to be born will act. However, God is not like us. Isaiah 46:9–11 says,

> I am God, and there is none like me,
> declaring the end from the beginning

<!-- page-363 -->

> and from ancient times things not yet done,
> saying, "My counsel shall stand,
> and I will accomplish all my purpose,"
> calling a bird of prey from the east,
> the man of my counsel from a far country.
> I have spoken, and I will bring it to pass;
> I have purposed, and I will do it.

So if God has a larger perspective, is it possible that he has a good reason for allowing evil to enter the world, a reason we might not be able to see? If he does have a good reason, it would break the logjam between God being either well-meaning and powerless, or powerful but ill intentioned.<sup>47</sup>

We've already seen how evil must be possible in order for human freedom to exist. But how probable is it that God has good reasons for permitting suffering? Skeptics might say, "Look around you. So much suffering seems pointless. Couldn't a powerful God figure out a way to at least reduce the suffering, even a little bit?"

In order to make this argument, skeptics would need an objective standard for good and evil as well as a standard by which to show that suffering is, in fact, indefensible. Their own worldview precludes this, however. If Richard Dawkins is correct in saying, "DNA just is, and we dance to its music," then little can be done about suffering aside from anesthetizing it. Because nothing can be done about evil, the atheist or naturalist argument here isn't as much about the problem of evil as it is about attacking the character of a God they don't believe in.

As humans, we do have a sense that evil is meaningless and that suffering is pointless. If bad people simply got what was coming to them, we might be less concerned. But when seemingly innocent people get hurt, especially our loved ones, our questions multiply. It's important to note, though, that biblical authors were not immune to this, nor did they try to hide it. The prophet Jeremiah implores, "Why does the way of the wicked prosper? Why do all who are treacherous thrive?" (Jer. 12:1).

As hard as this seems to bear, we simply may never know this side of eternity why bad things happen to good people. But as William Lane Craig says,

> As finite persons, we're limited in space and time, in intelligence and insight. But God sees the end of history from its beginning and providentially orders history to His ends through people's free decisions and actions. In order to achieve His purposes God may have to allow a great deal of suffering along the way. Suffering that appears pointless within our limited framework may be seen to have been justly permitted by God within His wider framework.<sup>48</sup>

This does not mean we should stop asking questions of God. The biblical authors, operating under God's authority and the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, certainly didn't stop asking questions. But our mind-set and attitude matter. Arguments against God's goodness—such as those posed by William Rowe, philosophy professor and author of a popular argument against God based on the problem of evil—assume that what we know is sufficiently representative of what God knows, and therefore we are justified in saying that pointless suffering indicates

<!-- page-364 -->

there is no God.<sup>49</sup> As philosopher Greg Gansle points out, saying, "I can't think of a good reason for allowing this evil, so there isn't one," is a weak argument if we aren't as smart as God or even as smart as we think we are.<sup>50</sup>

Gansle illustrates this from the life of Christ himself:

> Let's take the case of Lazarus's death in John 11. Lazarus was likely in the prime of his life. He's a good man and a close friend of Jesus. Lazarus becomes ill and dies. The citizens of his village, Bethany, could see such an evil and after three days of mourning come to the conclusion that there is no reason for this. Therefore, God doesn't exist. Then Jesus comes to Bethany. Lazarus's sisters, Mary and Martha, chastise Jesus for not getting there sooner. As we read John's account, we see that unbeknownst to Mary and Martha, Jesus had reasons for delaying. Moreover, there were reasons Lazarus was permitted to die in the prime of his life. When Jesus arrived at Lazarus's tomb, He prayed and then called Lazarus to come out of the tomb four days after his death. The reason for Lazarus's sickness, death, Jesus's delay, and Lazarus's resuscitation was that God's glory might be seen. Some of the citizens might have thought they had a strong case against the existence of God the three days after Lazarus died. But subsequent events place the evil of Lazarus's death in a much different context. In light of this context, Lazarus's death is seen to be part of a much greater good than anyone in Bethany could imagine.<sup>51</sup>

When we see evil things happen, it may not be that God is unaware or helpless but rather that larger factors than we can see with our human eyes are at play.

So rather than denying that evil exists, or denying that it has meaning, God-followers through the ages have recognized that evil *does* exist, that it hurts, and that we might go to our graves with our most pressing questions unanswered. And yet we will pray for patience and perseverance in the confidence that God knows what we do not know and that he will redeem our suffering to good purposes.

> **Best of All Possible Worlds, the:** a theory by Gottfried Wilhelm von Leibniz that states that the best of all possible worlds is the belief that the world we inhabit has been structured by God to maximize good and minimize evil.

**This is the best possible world: A response to natural evil.** As we have seen, sin causes humans to do bad things to one another. But what about such things as earthquakes and tsunamis and floods for which humans simply cannot be held responsible? Even if humans could have taken action to limit their destructiveness, these natural events still cause suffering. Clearly, natural evil differs from wicked acts committed by morally responsible people.<sup>52</sup>

Some philosophers, starting with the German mathematician and philosopher Gottfried Leibniz in 1710, have made a very interesting point about natural evil: perhaps God has created the **best of all possible worlds**, and although bad things happen, the world itself has been structured by God to maximize good and minimize evil to the greatest possible extent. This view was articulated by Leibniz in a work titled *Essais de Théodicée sur la bonté de Dieu, la liberté de l'homme et l'origine du mal* (*Attempts at a Theodicy on the Goodness of God, the Freedom

<!-- page-365 -->

of Man, and the Origin of Evil*). Leibniz described the subject of his work as **theodicy**, which is a combination of two Greek words, *theos* ("God") and *dike* ("judgment"). Theodicy is the attempt to show that God's ways are justified.

> **Theodicy:** a rational justification for why God would allow evil.

Garrett DeWeese, a professor at the Talbot School of Theology, has expanded on Leibniz's point by positing that there are an infinite number of possible worlds that contain goods and that God created a world in which goods such as creativity exist and in which new things can actually happen.<sup>53</sup> More specifically, DeWeese argues that God created a dynamic world, which is a great good but can be subject to disturbances that cause it to behave erratically. Obviously, this is a controversial view. After all, if the garden of Eden was designed to be a place of *shalom*, and if it was sin—not natural evil—that ruptured that *shalom* (Rom. 5:12ff.),<sup>54</sup> we face a question of whether the initial conditions on the earth were really idyllic, as many assume they were. This point will probably be debated long after our lives end.

Norman Geisler, perhaps the most prolific author on Christian apologetics in our age, is one who finds the "best of all possible worlds" argument compelling. He points out that some physical evil is the by-product of good things we enjoy in the world today:

> Drowning is a byproduct of having water at our disposal to enjoy. Unintentional shooting deaths occur with guns meant for sport or food gathering. Rain that nourishes the soil also causes floods. Winds renew the air, but tornados sometimes spin up. Earthquakes recycle minerals needed for life but also cause death and destruction. Both hurricanes and tsunamis are byproducts of good natural processes. The greater enjoyment of flying, boating, or mountain climbing are the occasion of accidents that are byproducts of a good practice.<sup>55</sup>

Every step we take risks a fall, says Geisler. Does this mean we should never try to walk? If Leibniz, DeWeese, and Geisler have it right, natural evil is hurtful and disruptive, but it is part of life that is the best possible good. Still, as we saw earlier, the "best of all possible worlds" argument must be taken in the context of the goodness of God's creation and the reality of human fallenness. Sin infected what was once good and perfect. Someday the goodness of creation will be restored. Revelation 21:4 says, "He will wipe away every tear from their eyes, and death shall be no more, neither shall there be mourning, nor crying, nor pain anymore, for the former things have passed away."

**Is there anything we humans ought to do about evil?** In 2011, an earthquake in Japan, measuring 9.0 on the Richter scale, killed nineteen thousand people. The year prior, an earthquake of a much lesser magnitude, about one-quarter as strong, killed around two hundred thousand people in Haiti. Both were unspeakable tragedies, but the magnitude of suffering was altogether different. How did an earthquake in Haiti that was one-quarter the strength of the earthquake in Japan nonetheless kill ten times the people? The answer, unfortunately, has much to do with the misuse of human freedom. Corruption, government incompetence, poverty, economic mismanagement, and the embrace of wrong worldviews all play a role.<sup>56</sup>

<!-- page-366 -->

Mark Mittelberg estimates in his book *The Questions Christians Hope No One Will Ask* that as much as 90 percent of nonnatural deaths (those not related to dying naturally from old age) result from human causes such as wars, crime, human trafficking, racial genocide, and sexually transmitted diseases such as HIV/AIDS. Human-caused pollution alone is said to cause 40 percent of the deaths worldwide.<sup>57</sup>

Governments, charged with protecting their people from abuse, cause a shocking amount of the world's evil as well. Historian R. J. Rummel said that more human beings in the twentieth century died at the hands of their governments, committed to Marxist or fascist ideology, than in all previous centuries combined. The murder of more than one hundred million innocent people created unimaginable suffering for the victims, their families, their friends, and their communities.<sup>58</sup>

If we remain apathetic about human fallenness, we will have missed history's most significant lesson: sin devastates, but a commitment to justice and human dignity has led to many profound efforts to alleviate suffering. According to researcher Scott Todd, extreme poverty has dropped by half in just the last generation, from 52 percent of the world's population to 26 percent.<sup>59</sup> One billion more people have access to improved water supplies than in 1990.<sup>60</sup> Though tuberculosis is still a major killer, the death rate from the disease is down 40 percent from twenty years ago.<sup>61</sup> Polio cases have decreased 99 percent since 1988.<sup>62</sup> Significant progress is being made in the fight against malaria as well.<sup>63</sup> These remarkable advances came from people using their God-given gifts and opportunities to bring redemption to the suffering. Christian artist Matthew West summarizes it well: "I shook my fist at heaven and said, 'God, why don't you do something?' He said, 'I did. I created you.'"<sup>64</sup>

So far we have seen that Scripture explains the past and gives meaning to the present. But that is not all. It also gives us hope for the future.

### The Christian Answer to the Problem of Evil Gives Us Hope for the Future

Some people become so discouraged by evil and suffering that they stop trying to take action to secure a better future. They lose hope. But a biblical view of the problem of evil helps restore hope.

**In his sovereignty, God directs us to take responsibility.** The more we contemplate God's character, the more we can see his wisdom in not strictly controlling everything that happens. This ought to bring alive our own sense of responsibility. We are not bound by fate to what happens; we can choose to act. As Udo Middelmann says, "Christians are not drugged into faith by an opiate of religion that makes them see no evil and resign themselves to their present experience."<sup>65</sup>

> Knowing that God expects us to take responsibility—and that our actions will have real consequences—might actually draw us closer to him.

Knowing that God expects us to take responsibility—and that our actions will have real consequences—might actually draw us closer to him. As professor of ethics and apologetics R. Scott Smith puts it,

> This God invites all people to come and reason together with him, to even enjoy him, and to know that they have been endowed by their creator with real freedom and responsibility to act in the world in

<!-- page-367 -->

> ways that should bring about goodness, not evil, thereby benefiting others and giving glory to their good, holy God. It is this view that I think best describes the reality of good and evil, right and wrong, and our being moral agents.<sup>66</sup>

**So is God the cause of evil?** It depends on what is meant by the word *cause*. As Geisler summarizes, "God is the author of everything, including evil, in the sense that He permits it, but not in the sense that He produces it. Evil happens in His permissive will, but He does not promote evil in His perfect will. God allows evil yet does not encourage it."<sup>67</sup> Most people who argue that God is responsible for evil reason that if God created everything and evil exists, God is responsible for the creation of evil. But as we have seen, evil is not a thing. It is the absence of a good, not a thing in itself. It is not part of creation.

But still, why would God allow his creation to be tampered with by evil? As a father, I believe I have a glimpse of why God might not jump in and intervene in every situation in which evil is corroding that which is good. When my children were younger, I found myself on many occasions tempted to direct their minute-by-minute actions. I wanted the best for them, and I told myself that it would be best if I met all their needs. But it didn't take long to realize that they needed the freedom to make mistakes and learn from them. Growing up involves the freedom to experience needs and the freedom to figure out how to meet them.

> We should clarify that God is *in charge* in the sense that he rules the universe and yet permits evil actions in human history even as he moves us toward the consummation of his sovereign plan.

We should not, therefore, talk about God's "sovereignty" as implying that he is dictating the actions of every atom in the universe. Rather, we should clarify that God is *in charge* in the sense that he rules the universe and yet permits evil actions in human history even as he moves us toward the consummation of his sovereign plan.<sup>68</sup> Michael Bauman explains this distinction with the analogy of a director and a play. God does not dangle us from strings like puppets; rather, he directs us as in a play. God is such a magnificent director that even though he allows the actors to ad-lib as they desire, the play is coming together exactly as God wishes. It's his play, after all.<sup>69</sup>

**There is hope.** Author Randy Alcorn reminds us that "evil is temporary; God's goodness and our joy will be eternal."<sup>70</sup> Elisabeth Elliot, whose husband Jim Elliot was killed by an Ecuadorian tribe with whom he was trying to share the gospel, writes, "When our souls lie barren in a winter which seems hopeless and endless, God has not abandoned us. His work goes on. He asks our acceptance of the painful process and our trust that He will indeed give resurrection life."<sup>71</sup> Alcorn summarizes, "One day, evil will end. Forever. Suffering and weeping are real and profound, but for God's children, they are temporary. Eternal joy is on its way."<sup>72</sup> A biblical response to evil shapes evil's meaning and transforms its awful power into hope.

Perhaps this is why the Bible focuses so much on hope. Job said, "Though he slay me, I will hope in him" (Job 13:15). Psalm 33:22 says, "Let your steadfast love, O Lord, be upon us even as we hope in you." Psalm 78:7 admonishes the children of Israel to teach their children well so they would "set their hope in God." Proverbs 23:18 says, "Surely there is a future, and

<!-- page-368 -->

your hope will not be cut off." Romans 5:4 says, "Endurance produces character, and character produces hope."

Hope possesses enormous power. William Damon, a professor at Stanford University, has shown that having a personal sense of purpose—a sense of what life is all about—radically alters how people cope with their circumstances. Those without purpose report anxiety, disappointment, discouragement, and despair. Those with purpose report joy in spite of sacrifices they must make, a sense of energy, satisfaction, and persistence when they run into obstacles.<sup>73</sup>

These are remarkable findings. Everyone experiences trials, but some grow stronger through them, and others weaker. What makes the difference? For the non-Christian, suffering is a harsh reality that must be avoided at all costs, but for the Christian, suffering may be used by God to discipline and strengthen one's faith. Christians are sometimes called to plunge joyously into suffering in obedience to God (Heb. 12:7–11;<sup>74</sup> Acts 6:8–7:60). And the deeper the pain, the more this is so. As professor William Kirk Kilpatrick says, "The real test of a theory or way of life, however, is not whether it can relieve pain but what it says about the pain it cannot relieve.... In Christianity it has great meaning."<sup>75</sup>

> For the non-Christian, suffering is a harsh reality that must be avoided at all costs, but for the Christian, suffering may be used by God to discipline and strengthen one's faith.

*Time* magazine spoke to this matter of suffering some years ago with an edition titled "Special Mind and Body Issue."<sup>76</sup> In one article, researchers looked at why "religious people are less stressed and happier than nonbelievers." After describing the setbacks in the life of forty-one-year-old Karen Granger (husband laid off, a miscarriage, cousin's breast cancer, two hurricanes, and her best friend's brain tumor), *Time* reports that Granger, a Christian, claims to have relied on her faith, saying, "As a consequence, I haven't lost my joy."<sup>77</sup>

*Time* asks the question "So, what has science learned about what makes the human heart sing?"<sup>78</sup> Although wealth, education, and good weather do not make the heart sing, faith truly consoles although "it's tough to tell whether it's the God part or the community aspect that does the heavy lifting."<sup>79</sup> Interesting question, but it's a false choice. In reality it is both. Through Jesus, God became flesh and initiated a community that is his body. It is this body of Christ—the church—that brings hope into a suffering world.

Clearly, people can experience meaning and purpose without religious faith. Still, it is more than a little interesting that the academic research so strongly parallels the biblical account of what life is about and what to do when bad things happen. Although many people in this sinful world are born into purposeless lives through no fault of their own—born into famine, forced into child prostitution, born with drug addictions because of their parents' drug use, and so forth—Jesus has promised, "In the world you will have tribulation. But take heart; I have overcome the world" (John 16:33). Hope has arrived and is rallying the hopeless to God's banner of love.

## 4. Dealing with Evil Personally

When people ask, "Why would God allow bad things to happen?" they are usually asking, "Why would God allow bad things to happen to *me*?" We feel sad that people suffer, but the philosophical crisis becomes acute when suffering finds us. And suffering does find us. Perhaps you have been abused or abandoned; perhaps you have lost people who were important to you; maybe your trust was violated or you were cheated. If you are human, you have been hurt. Even we in a relatively pampered and developed world still suffer.

<!-- page-369 -->

Much of our indignation in light of our suffering might come from our belief that God is like a kindly grandfather who loves us and wants us to be happy. We have come to believe, as William Lane Craig muses, that "God's role is to provide a comfortable environment for His human pets."<sup>80</sup>

The message of Scripture, though, is that God is not primarily interested in our comfort. Craig continues,

> We are not God's pets, and the goal of human life is not happiness per se, but the knowledge of God—which in the end will bring true and everlasting human fulfillment. Much of the suffering in life may be utterly pointless with respect to the goal of producing human happiness; but it may not be pointless with respect to producing a deeper knowledge of God.<sup>81</sup>

The chief end of humanity is not temporal happiness but deep knowledge of and intimate relationship with God. That Craig would make this argument is interesting because he personally lives daily with a neuromuscular disorder that slowly atrophies his muscles and could lead to terrible disability. Each morning, he chooses to bear up under suffering and stay focused on knowing God more.

As we saw earlier, the Bible does not dismiss the reality of suffering. In Psalm 13:1–2, David cries out, "How long, O Lord? Will you forget me forever? How long will you hide your face from me? How long must I take counsel in my soul and have sorrow in my heart all the day? How long shall my enemy be exalted over me?" Even the God-man Jesus Christ felt anguish over suffering. In the garden of Gethsemane, he says, "Father, if you are willing, remove this cup from me" (Luke 22:42).

But the Bible does counsel a particular kind of response to suffering: an unshakable confidence in God's goodness. "I will sing to the Lord, because he has dealt bountifully with me," David says in Psalm 13:6. And even though Jesus is preparing to face unspeakable agony, he concludes his prayer with complete trust in God: "Nevertheless, not my will, but yours, be done" (Luke 22:42).

For Randy Alcorn, these passages show David's and Jesus's determination not to bury themselves in their sorrows but to cry out to God to deliver them, fully believing he has their best in mind. As Alcorn studied the Old Testament book of Job, he learned a great deal about the reality of suffering and how to see it from God's perspective:

> Through Job's story, God offers paradigm-shifting insights to face suffering. Job has taught me many valuable lessons, including these: Life is not predictable or

<!-- page-370 -->

> formulaic. Most of life's expectations and suffering's explanations are simplistic and naïve, waiting to be toppled. When the day of crisis comes, we should pour out our hearts to God, who can handle our grief and even our anger. We should not turn from God and internalize our anger, allowing it to become bitterness. We should weigh and measure the words of friends, authors, teachers, and counselors, finding whatever truth they might speak without embracing their errors or getting derailed by their insensitivities. We should not insist on taking control by demanding a rational explanation for the evils and suffering that befall us. We should look to God and ask him to reveal himself to us; in contemplating his greatness we will come to see him as the Answer above all answers. We should trust that God is working behind the scenes and that our suffering has hidden purposes that one day, even if not in this life, we will see. We should cry out to Jesus, the mediator and friend whom Job could only glimpse, but who indwells us by grace.<sup>82</sup>

About Job, author Philip Yancey says, "Job clung to God's justice when he was the best example in history of God's apparent injustice. He did not seek the Giver because of his gifts; when all gifts were removed he still sought the Giver."<sup>83</sup>

## 5. Conclusion

When it comes to understanding evil and suffering, we now see that God has created a world in which moral good is actually possible. We can *know* good and recognize when it is being attacked by evil. We can *do* good that is meaningful because it is possible for us to do otherwise.<sup>84</sup>

If someone asks you how God could allow evil, ask them in turn, "What do you mean by evil?" Is evil something that actually exists, or is it just a category into which we put things we prefer not to have happened? To know that something is evil, we have to know that it is not the way it is supposed to be. Where do we get this sense of "oughtness"? Why do we have the sense that reality ought to be good? If there is no God, there is no reason to expect it to be.<sup>85</sup>

> Without a normative sense of "oughtness," there is really no such thing as good and therefore no point in our noting when it is being violated.

To put it in philosophical terms, we cannot make sense of the problem of evil without a normative sense of "oughtness." If people who parachuted out of airplanes occasionally went up instead of down, we would say the law of gravity is not normative. Because they know the law of gravity is normative, though, jumpers carefully check their chutes before leaping out of the plane. Going up or down is not a matter of preference. In the same way, without a normative sense of "oughtness," there is really no such thing as good and therefore no point in our noting when it is being violated.

But our humanity demands more than philosophical explanations. The universal realization that something is wrong in the world that needs to be fixed leads us to better understand the meaning behind Jesus's own suffering on the cross. As Yancey says, "Any discussion of how pain and suffering fit into God's scheme ultimately leads back to the cross."<sup>86</sup> It is at the cross that God declared victory. The apostle Paul wrote in 1 Corinthians 15:54–58,

<!-- page-371 -->

> When the perishable puts on the imperishable, and the mortal puts on immortality, then shall come to pass the saying that is written: "Death is swallowed up in victory." "O death, where is your victory? O death, where is your sting?" The sting of death is sin, and the power of sin is the law. But thanks be to God, who gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. Therefore, my beloved brothers, be steadfast, immovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, knowing that in the Lord your labor is not in vain.

Respected theologian and Anglican pastor John Stott related his experience in Asian temples, standing respectfully before the statue of Buddha, eyes closed and detached from the world's agonies:

> I could never myself believe in God, if it were not for the cross.... In the real world of pain, how could one worship a God who was immune to it?... In imagination I have turned ... to that lonely, twisted, tortured figure on the cross, nails through hands and feet, back lacerated, limbs wrenched, brow bleeding from thorn-pricks, mouth dry and intolerably thirsty, plunged in Godforsaken darkness. That is the God for me!<sup>87</sup>

This is a hugely important insight. Philosophical approaches to the problem of evil are important, but if we remain at that level—that is, if we remain merely philosophical—then we miss the mark. As speaker John Stonestreet says, "Applying logical answers for the existence of evil to the emotional and personal struggles associated with a particular evil is to miss how Jesus Himself confronted it."<sup>88</sup>

A person in pain is experiencing not a philosophical problem but a personal problem. We ought to think carefully about the intellectual problem of evil, but as Alcorn says, "The answer to the problem of evil and suffering is not a philosophy, but a Person; not words, but the Word."<sup>89</sup>

> Through Christ, meaning emerges out of meaninglessness. In Christ, we have a model for what to do in the midst of pain. Because of Christ, God not only makes good possible, he makes good happen.

We do not have a God who is aloof or incomprehensible. We do not have a God who encourages us to ignore evil or treat it as an illusion. We do not have a pantheon of gods who are reckless or incapable of solving great problems. We have, instead, a God who is with us. As poet Edward Shillito says in his poem "Jesus of the Scars,"

> The other gods were strong; but Thou wast weak;
> They rode, but Thou didst stumble to a throne;
> But to our wounds only God's wounds can speak,
> And not a god has wounds, but Thou alone.<sup>90</sup>

God-with-us is the sun of righteousness breaking through the clouds of confusion and pain. Through Christ, meaning emerges out of meaninglessness. In Christ, we have a model for what to do in the midst of pain. Because of Christ, God not only makes good possible, but he makes good happen.<sup>91</sup>

<!-- page-372 -->

For our part, in the light of the cross, we can see clearly what is right and wrong, what is good and evil. We can—and must—walk with those who suffer. Says Douglas Groothuis, "Fighting against injustice, unbelief, prejudice, poverty, violence and stupidity is not done in vain if it is done 'in the Lord.'"<sup>92</sup>

And because of the cross, we have hope that God will conquer evil. In fact, the entire story of the Bible is how he is doing just that. Evil persists because God is patient in waiting for people to turn to him. Second Peter 3:9 says, "The Lord is not slow to fulfill his promise as some count slowness, but is patient toward you, not wishing that any should perish, but that all should reach repentance."

> The problem of evil may be the greatest objection to God's existence, but God's existence is the problem of evil's only solution.

In the end, the problem of evil may be the greatest objection to God's existence, but God's existence is the problem of evil's only solution. As William Lane Craig puts it, "If God does not exist, then we are locked without hope in a world filled with pointless and unredeemed suffering. God is the final answer to the problem of suffering, for He redeems us from evil and takes us into the everlasting joy of an incommensurable good: fellowship with Himself."<sup>93</sup> This has given meaning to the lives of millions of Christians throughout the ages and enables us in our own uncertain times to be people who live with hope and then inspire it in others.

There is, however, one aspect of God's answer to the problem of evil that has generated a great deal of controversy: the doctrine of hell. Is hell real, and would a God of love actually send people there? That's what we'll explore in the next chapter.

## Endnotes

1. Udo Middelmann, *The Innocence of God: Does God Ordain Evil?* (Colorado Springs, CO: Paternoster, 2007), 1–2.
2. Norman L. Geisler, *If God, Why Evil? A New Way to Think about the Question* (Minneapolis: Bethany, 2011), 19. Augustine discusses the problem of evil at length in *Confessions*, Book 7, which is available free online at www.ccel.org/a/augustine/confessions/confessions.html.
3. Alvin Plantinga, "Supralapsarianism, or 'O Felix Culpa,'" in *Christian Faith and the Problem of Evil*, ed. Peter van Inwagen (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 2004).
4. "Annual Disaster Statistical Review 2012: The Numbers and Trends," Reliefweb, August 31, 2013, reliefweb.int/report/world/annual-disaster-statistical-review-2012-numbers-and-trends.
5. Richard Dawkins, *River of Eden: A Darwinian View of Life* (New York: Basic Books, 1995), 133.
6. C. S. Lewis, *Mere Christianity* (San Francisco: Harper, 2009), 39.
7. Douglas R. Groothuis, *Christian Apologetics: A Comprehensive Case for Biblical Faith* (Downers Grove, IL: IVP Academic, 2011), 617–18.
8. Paul Vitz, *Psychology as Religion: The Cult of Self-Worship* (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 1985), 103.
9. William Kirk Kilpatrick, *Psychological Seduction: The Failure of Modern Psychology* (Nashville: Thomas Nelson, 1983), 185.
10. The world's five communist countries (China, Vietnam, Laos, North Korea, and Cuba) account for approximately one of every five people on the planet. They are not, however, the only ones dealing with Marxism's implications. Socialism is the official policy of many other nations (Bangladesh, India, Sri Lanka, Portugal, Tanzania, and Guyana). Countries with powerful socialist parties include France, Greece, Venezuela, Sweden, Zambia, Norway, and Algeria, among others. We could also add to this list countries that pursue socialist policies as a matter of practice or that are bent on destroying the right to private property, such as Zimbabwe.
11. V. I. Lenin, *Complete Collected Works*, 45 vols. (Moscow, USSR: Progress, 1980), 11:71.
12. www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1848/communist-manifesto/.
13. Lenin, *Complete Collected Works*, 10:83.
14. www.hawaii.edu/powerkills/COM.ART.HTM.
15. Jonathan Morrow, *Welcome to College: A Christ-Follower's Guide for the Journey* (Grand Rapids, MI: Kregel, 2008), 119.
16. Stephen Mitchell, trans., *Bhagavad Gita* (New York: Three Rivers, 2000), 47.
17. Hinduism is actually a religious culture that, according to Taylor University professor of philosophy Winfried Corduan, "has moved back and forth through various phases of monotheism, henotheism, polytheism and animism with each stage retaining at least a vestigial presence in the ensuing one. There is no set of core beliefs that remain constant throughout. The name itself, actually a label devised by Westerners, simply means 'the religion of India.'" Winfried Corduan, *Neighboring Faiths: A Christian Introduction to World Religions* (Downers Grove, IL: IVP Academic, 2012), 267. See also R. C. Zaehner, *Hinduism* (New York: Oxford University Press, 1983). Hinduism is primarily spread today through the practice of yoga, a meditative exercise. Whether this is harmful or not is the subject of much debate in the Christian community. For more information, see Albert Mohler's podcast "The Meaning of Yoga: A Conversation with Stephanie Syman and Doug Groothuis," www.albertmohler.com/2010/09/20/the-meaning-of-yoga-a-conversation-with-stephanie-syman-and-doug-groothuis/.
18. "A View of Buddhism: The Four Noble Truths," viewonbuddhism.org/4_noble_truths.html.
19. "The First Sermon of the Buddha," www.tricycle.com/new-buddhism/teachings-and-texts/first-sermon-buddha.
20. Marilyn Ferguson, *The Aquarian Conspiracy: Personal and Social Transformation in Our Time* (Los Angeles: J. P. Tarcher, 1980), 257.
21. Shakti Gawain, *Living in the Light: Follow Your Inner Guidance to Create a New Life and a New World*, with Laurel King (San Rafael, CA: New World Library, 1986), 156. Vera Alder goes even further, explaining that criminals who cause others to suffer should be celebrated because such suffering forces us to seek more urgently a connection with a higher consciousness: "A criminal or an idler will be recognized as a sick individual offering a splendid chance for wise help. Instead of being incarcerated with fellow unfortunates in the awful atmosphere of a prison, the future 'criminal' will be in much demand." Vera Alder, *When Humanity Comes of Age* (New York: Samuel Weiser, 1974), 82.
22. Groothuis, *Christian Apologetics*, 624.
23. Khurshid Ahmad, *Islam: Our Choice*, comp. and ed. Ebrahim Ahmed Bawany (1961), 2.
24. The Quran consistently refers to people as "servants" or "slaves" of Allah. See, just as a starting point, 2:23, 2:90, 2:186, 3:15, 3:20, 7:128, 7:194, 8:51, 10:107, 14:11, and 15:49. The Arabic word is *abd*, which means one who is totally subordinated, a slave. Badru Kateregga says, "The Christian witness, that man is created in the 'image and likeness of God,' is not the same as the Muslim witness." See Badru D. Kateregga and David W. Shenk, *Islam and Christianity: A Muslim and a Christian in Dialogue*, electronically available on The World of Islam: Resources for Understanding CD-ROM, published by Global Mapping International, 5350.
25. Middelmann, *The Innocence of God*, 197.
26. The Quran states, "Those who believe, and whose hearts find satisfaction in the remembrance of God: for without doubt in the remembrance of God do hearts find satisfaction. For those who believe and work righteousness, is (every) blessedness, and a beautiful place of (final) return" (13:28–29, A. Yusuf Ali, *The Holy Qur'an*).
27. I am by no means an expert on the Quran or its interpretation, but the teaching of the Quran seems clear about the complete control of Allah over creation: "Those whom Allah (in His Plan) willeth to guide, He openeth their breast to Islam; those whom He willeth to leave straying, He maketh their breast close and constricted, as if they had to climb to the skies: thus doth Allah (heap) the penalty on those who refuse to believe" (6:125); "If We had so willed, We could certainly have brought every soul its true guidance: but the Word from Me will come true, 'I will fill Hell with Jinns and men all together'" (32:13, A. Yusuf Ali, *The Holy Qur'an*); "But ye will not, except as Allah wills; for Allah is full of Knowledge and Wisdom" (76:30); "But ye shall not will except as Allah wills, the Cherisher of the Worlds" (81:29). Muzammil H. Siddiqi, president of the Islamic Society of North America says, in response to the question of why Allah allows evil, "Let us ask this question to understand Allah's ways in His creation. The Qur'an tells us that good, evil and whatever happens in this world happens by Allah's Will (mashi'at Allah). Only Allah knows fully His Will. We finite beings cannot grasp fully His infinite Will and Wisdom. He runs His universe the way He deems fit. The Qur'an tells us that Allah is Wise and everything that Allah does is right, just, good and fair. We must submit and surrender to His Will. The Qur'an has not given us all the details about Allah's Will, but it has enlightened us with the guidance that is useful and sufficient for us." "Why Does Allah Allow Suffering and Evil in the World?," interview with Muzammil H. Siddiqi, www.onislam.net/english/ask-the-scholar/muslim-creed/muslim-belief/174982-why-does-allah-allow-suffering-and-evil-in-the-world.html.
28. Sean McDowell and Jonathan Morrow, *Is God Just a Human Invention? And Seventeen Other Questions Raised by the New Atheists* (Grand Rapids, MI: Kregel, 2010), 213.
29. Cornelius Plantinga, *Not the Way It's Supposed to Be: A Breviary of Sin* (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 1995), 199.
30. This reference plays off the title of Plantinga's *Not the Way It's Supposed to Be*.
31. The references to this are slim, making it hard to figure out exactly what happened. Isaiah 14:12 says, "How you are fallen from heaven, O Day Star, son of Dawn! How you are cut down to the ground, you who laid the nations low." The immediate reference is to the king of Babylon, but many Christians compare this account to that in Revelation 12, which describes a heavenly battle in which the "coup" leader and his followers,
32. Revelation 12:9: "the great dragon was thrown down, that ancient serpent, who is called the devil and Satan, the deceiver of the whole world—he was thrown down to the earth, and his angels were thrown down with him."
33. Revelation 20:2: "He seized the dragon, that ancient serpent, who is the devil and Satan, and bound him for a thousand years."
34. Norman Geisler says, "Many consider this an insoluble mystery. But is it? Not really, not once we understand what free choice entails. The best way to comprehend the basis of a free act is to examine the three possible alternatives. A free act is either uncaused, caused by another, or self-caused; that is, it is undetermined, determined by another, or self-determined. No action can be uncaused (undetermined); that would be a violation of the law of causality (every event has a cause). Neither can a free act be caused by another; for if someone or something else caused the action, then it is not ours. Neither a free act be caused by another; for if someone or something else caused the action, then it is not ours. We would not be responsible for it. Hence all free actions must be self-caused (that is, caused by our free choice). Now we can answer the question, 'What caused Lucifer to sin?' No one did. He is the cause of his own sin. Sin is a self-caused action, one for which we cannot blame anyone or anything else. Who caused the first sin? Lucifer. How did he cause it? By the power of free choice, which God gave him." Geisler, *If God, Why Evil?*, 30–31. It should be noted that Geisler's point is highly disputed. Do angels have free will? Did they once but no longer? Scripture doesn't tell us. If angels are free, we'd expect more to be failing since, but we have no scriptural record of this happening. Also, if Lucifer was the cause of Adam and Eve's sin, was there an agent who caused his own sin? Because Scripture says little about these questions, we are left with pondering them in humility, which is not a bad thing.
35. Geisler, *If God, Why Evil?*, 30–31.
36. For a helpful exploration of this doctrine amid challenges of Open Theism, see William Lane Craig's very readable book, *What Does God Know? Reconciling Divine Foreknowledge and Human Freedom* (Norcross, GA: RZIM, 2002).
37. Gordon Lewis, "Attributes of God," in *Evangelical Dictionary of Theology*, ed. Walter A. Elwell (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2001), 494.
38. Thanks to R. Scott Smith for articulating this point. R. Scott Smith, *In Search of Moral Knowledge: Overcoming the Fact/Value Dichotomy* (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity, 2014). See also Middelmann, *The Innocence of God*, 134.
39. William Lane Craig, *Divine Foreknowledge and Human Freedom: The Coherence of Theism* (Leiden, NJ: Brill, 1991).
40. Although there is disagreement among Muslims about the nature of free will, just as there is among Christians, the primary teaching of Islamic theologians seems to be that God is in control to the extent that free will is an illusion. One source for this theology is in the "Hadith," a collection of the sayings of the Prophet Muhammad. In *Sahih al-Bukhari*, vol. 4, bk. 54, hadith 430, we are given the narration of Abdullah bin Mus'ud who recorded Muhammad saying the following: "(The matter of the Creation of) a human being is put together in the womb of the mother in forty days, and then he becomes a clot of thick blood for a similar period, and then a piece of flesh for a similar period. Then Allah sends an angel who is ordered to write four things. He is ordered to write down his (i.e. the new creature's) deeds, his livelihood, his (date of) death, and whether he will be blessed or wretched (in the Hereafter). Then the soul is breathed into him. So, a man amongst you may do (good) deeds till there is only a cubit between him and Paradise and then what has been written for him decides his behavior and he starts doing (evil) deeds characteristic of the people of the (Hell) Fire. And similarly a man amongst you may do (evil) deeds till there is only a cubit between him and the (Hell) Fire, and then what has been written for him decides his behavior, and he starts doing deeds characteristic of the people of Paradise," p. 40. Sayyid Mujtaba Musavi Lari, in "Lesson 19: Free Will," explains, "Just as all creatures in the world lack independence in their essence, all being dependent on God, they also lack independence in causation and the production of effects. Hence, we have the doctrine of unity of acts, meaning perception of the fact that the entire system of being, with its causes and effects, its laws and its norms, is the work of God and comes into being from His Will; every factor and cause owes to Him not only the essence of its existence, but also its ability to act
