<!-- page-379 -->
# Chapter 15: What's the Deal with Hell?

## 1. The Problem with Hell

For many, Christianity would be far more attractive if it didn't include the doctrine of hell. Bertrand Russell—mathematician, philosopher, and author of *Why I Am Not a Christian*—said,

<!-- page-380 -->

> There is one very serious defect to my mind in Christ's moral character, and that is that He believed in hell. I do not myself feel that any person who is really profoundly humane can believe in everlasting punishment.... [The doctrine of hell] put cruelty into the world and gave the world generations of cruel torture; and the Christ of the Gospels, if you could take Him as his chroniclers represent Him, would certainly have to be considered partly responsible for that.<sup>1</sup>

The Bible presents hell as a small but significant part of God's answer to the problem of evil. Judgment eventually comes to the wicked. To Russell, though, the doctrine of hell is a cruel and unjust source of evil in the world.

Jesus had compassion on the suffering, died for the sins of the world, and taught widely admired moral principles. In this light, the harshness of his teaching on hell does seem to be at odds with his other teachings. So is Russell right? Are Jesus's teachings on hell morally defective and cruel?

Let's start with this: one's discomfort with an idea or teaching has no bearing on how well grounded or true the idea actually is.<sup>2</sup> Still, Christians who take Jesus's teachings on hell seriously are often rewarded with ridicule. One of my university professors assigned us to read Jonathan Edwards's sermon "Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God," in which Edwards pleads with his hearers to recognize the precariousness of their state before God and seek redemption. To my professor, the actual content of Edwards's sermon was of little significance because it "proved" that Edwards was mean-spirited and hated for people to have a good time. Without expressly saying so, my professor implied that people who believe like Edwards should be similarly written off.

Edwards should not be so easily dismissed. A leading intellectual of his day, and for a brief time the president of what is now Princeton University, Edwards based his teaching on eternal punishment on the awesomeness of God, not any kind of vengeful spirit:

> God is a being infinitely lovely, because he hath infinite excellency and beauty. To have infinite excellency and beauty, is the same thing as to have infinite loveliness. He is a being of infinite greatness, majesty, and glory; and therefore he is infinitely honourable. He is infinitely exalted above the greatest potentates of the earth, and highest angels in heaven; and therefore he is infinitely more honourable than they. His authority over us is infinite; and the ground of his right to our obedience is infinitely strong; for he is infinitely worthy to be obeyed himself, and we have an absolute, universal, and infinite dependence upon him. So that sin against God, being a violation of infinite obligations, must be a crime infinitely heinous, and so deserving of infinite punishment.<sup>3</sup>

To Edwards, the Bible's teachings on eternal punishment were proof of mercy, not meanness. According to apologist Douglas Groothuis, this should ground our thinking on hell today also:

> Only by understanding hell can we grasp the immensity of God's love. God's love took his Son to the hell of the cross for our sake. This is a costly love, a bloody love that has

<!-- page-381 -->

> no parallel in any of the world's religions. Although other religions (particularly Islam) threaten hell, none offer the sure deliverance from it that Christianity offers through the sacrificial love of God himself. In this sense Jesus Christ suffered hell for his people.<sup>4</sup>

Nonbelievers and believers alike may find this difficult to grasp, but hell's seriousness serves best to underscore the immensity of God's mercy. What the human race needs is not just a cosmic pat on the head before being sent out to play; we need saving, and we know we can't rescue ourselves.

As we have seen throughout this book, the scriptural picture of God is of a mighty deliverer, not a grumpy old man. The apostle Peter wrote, "The Lord is not slow to fulfill his promise as some count slowness, but is patient toward you, not wishing that any should perish, but that all should reach repentance" (2 Pet. 3:9). This was true in the Old Testament, even of Israel's enemies. As scholar Old Testament scholar Walter Kaiser Jr. pointed out, God wanted even the Egyptians, those who enslaved his chosen people, to come to know him as Lord (Exod. 8:22, 29–30).<sup>5</sup> Some of Pharaoh's servants did, in fact, come to worship God (Exod. 9:20),<sup>6</sup> and it's possible that some even joined the Israelites when they left Egypt, which would account for the "mixed multitude" described in Exodus 12:38.<sup>7</sup>

Even in view of God's mercy, however, many people still recoil at the doctrine of hell. Most Christians find it uncomfortable to discuss. Still, diminishing hell's importance also diminishes the love and justice of God. Therefore, trying to uncouple the doctrine of hell from the train of gospel thought would be a serious mistake.

To see how this is so, we need to investigate what the Bible says about hell, the purpose of hell, the justice of hell, and the common questions people ask about hell. Our goal, whether or not the outcome feels comfortable, is to see if this doctrine is reasonable, consistent with God's character, and taught by Scripture.

## 2. What the Bible Says about Hell

As with most topics, we are tempted to approach the topic of hell based on what *we* think rather than what *God* thinks. We ought not do this. C. S. Lewis was once reading a periodical in which the author claimed that "the fundamental thing is how we think of God." Lewis replied indignantly, "By God Himself, it is not! How God thinks of us is not only more important, but infinitely more important."<sup>8</sup>

> People don't like seeing themselves as sinners who deserve wrath, so they cast Christianity as a primitive fable invented by superstitious, unscientific people whose faith helped them deal with fear and uncertainty.

Lewis was right. What we think about God is important, as we have noted before, but if he actually exists as described in the Bible, his perspective is higher than ours and what he reveals is of utmost importance. If we begin with the belief that the Bible accurately describes the contours of the world as it actually is (a belief that we defended earlier), then our journey will be quite different from having begun with the belief that it cannot be true unless it meets the test of human pleasantry. As I quoted Flannery O'Connor before, "Truth does not change by our ability to stomach it emotionally."

<!-- page-382 -->

The issues of truth and authority are exactly the sticking point for most people, who have no problem acknowledging Christianity's power in helping people overcome addictions, leave anger behind, reunite with their spouses, and be kinder to their children. Of course, many believe that Buddhism, Hinduism, and atheism can do that too. "It doesn't matter what you believe," we often hear, "as long as you believe in something." In other words, religions may be useful, but they aren't really *true*.

> **Regeneration:** God's making people new through his Holy Spirit.

> **Conversion:** a turning from idolatry to the one true God.

> **Justification:** being declared righteous by God through the work of Jesus Christ.

> **Adoption:** being included as a rightful member of God's eternal family.

> **Sanctification:** the process whereby believers advance in holiness.

> **Glorification:** the point at which believers become closely identified with Christ.

This belief about beliefs, of course, assumes that the biblical narrative, from creation to the fall to redemption, is simply *untrue*. People don't like seeing themselves as sinners who deserve wrath, so they cast Christianity as a primitive fable invented by superstitious, unscientific people whose faith helped them deal with fear and uncertainty. Just like all religions, Christianity would at best be interesting, but not true.

If Christianity is nothing more than a primitive superstition, the doctrine of hell must be seen in that light, and Christianity's answer to the question "What happens when we die?" becomes just as incomprehensible as every other answer. As we have seen throughout the earlier chapters of this book, the claim that "Christianity is a primitive superstition" simply does not fit the facts. We have good reason to believe in God's revelation in Scripture. Because this is the case, let's examine several Scripture passages in both the Old and the New Testaments to see exactly what the doctrine of hell entails.

### What Do We Mean by "Saved"?

First Thessalonians 1:10 describes Jesus as the one who delivers us from the wrath to come.<sup>10</sup> Exactly what it means to be delivered, or saved, has been the subject of theological discussions for two thousand years, and we don't presume to offer the final word in this chapter. We can at least say that Scripture describes several things that happen in salvation: **regeneration** (God's making people new through his Holy Spirit—see Titus 3:5),<sup>11</sup> **conversion** (a turning from idolatry to the one true God—see Acts 15:3),<sup>12</sup> **justification** (being declared righteous by God—see Rom. 3:24),<sup>13</sup> **adoption** (being included as a rightful member of God's eternal family—see Rom. 8:15, 23),<sup>14</sup> **sanctification** (advancing in holiness—see Rom. 15:16),<sup>15</sup> and **glorification** (becoming closely identified with Christ—see Rom. 8:17).<sup>16</sup>

Scripture does not teach that these are distinct steps or anything we can accomplish ourselves. They are described as the work of the Holy Spirit, saving people from the just penalty that would otherwise accompany sin.

<!-- page-383 -->

### Does the Bible Actually Teach the Doctrine of Hell?

The answer is yes. In Matthew 5:22, Jesus said, "I say to you that everyone who is angry with his brother will be liable to judgment; whoever insults his brother will be liable to the council; and whoever says, 'You fool!' will be liable to the hell of fire." In Matthew 23:33, Jesus strongly condemned certain religious leaders of his day when he said, "You serpents, you brood of vipers, how are you to escape being sentenced to hell?"

> **Judgment:** the act of ruling or sentencing based on the careful deliberation of evidence and circumstances.

> **Wrath:** retributive punishment for an offense.

The biblical teaching of hell is usually presented in the context of **judgment**. In Matthew 25:46, Jesus describes the different fates of the wicked and the righteous. The wicked "will go away into eternal punishment, but the righteous into eternal life." Eternal punishment is an expression of God's **wrath** (Col. 3:6),<sup>17</sup> but whatever wrath is to come is exactly what Jesus delivers us from (1 Thess. 1:10).<sup>18</sup>

According to the apostle John's writing in Revelation 6:16–17, this wrath is something from which every right-thinking person will want to be saved. It is so terrible that those who face it will call to the mountains and rocks, "Fall on us and hide us from the face of him who is seated on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb, for the great day of their wrath has come, and who can stand?" Christopher W. Morgan and Robert A. Peterson say that this final judgment, anticipated both in Daniel 12:1–2<sup>19</sup> and Isaiah 66:24,<sup>20</sup> is taught in the Gospels and the letters of the apostles Paul and Peter as well as in the apocalyptic writing of the apostle John.<sup>21</sup> John's writings are particularly graphic, as seen in this passage from Revelation 20:11–15:

> Then I saw a great white throne and him who was seated on it. From his presence earth and sky fled away, and no place was found for them. And I saw the dead, great and small, standing before the throne, and books were opened. Then another book was opened, which is the book of life. And the dead were judged by what was written in the books, according to what they had done. And the sea gave up the dead who were in it, Death and Hades gave up the dead who were in them, and they were judged, each one of them, according to what they had done. Then Death and Hades were thrown into the lake of fire. This is the second death, the lake of fire. And if anyone's name was not found written in the book of life, he was thrown into the lake of fire.

Clearly, the Bible refers to hell a great deal. To strip away its teaching about hell would fundamentally alter the message of much of the New Testament, especially the Gospels. The very idea that Jesus died on the cross to reconcile us to God so we would not spend eternity apart from him would become meaningless.

### How Does the Bible Describe Hell?

Although there are many passages thought to refer to eternal punishment, here are some that describe what hell is like:

<!-- page-384 -->

- A place of outer darkness (Matt. 8:12; 22:13)<sup>22</sup>
- "Outside" the gate of the city of God (Rev. 22:14–15)<sup>23</sup>
- Away from the "presence of the Lord" (Matt. 25:41)<sup>24</sup>
- Outside in the dark forever (Matt. 8:12; Jude v. 13)<sup>25</sup>
- A perpetually burning dump (Mark 9:43–48)<sup>26</sup>
- A place of anguish and regret (Luke 16:28)<sup>27</sup>
- An eternal separation from God (2 Thess. 1:7–9)<sup>28</sup>

In chapter 16 of Luke's gospel, Scripture records a parable told by Jesus about a poor man named Lazarus who died and went to heaven while the rich man from whom Lazarus begged during his lifetime died and went to a "place of torment." In the parable, Jesus describes the rich man as being in a place of anguish and regret (Luke 16:23–28). "A great chasm ha[d] been fixed" (v. 26) between where Lazarus and the rich man found themselves. Because Jesus told the story as a parable, it is unclear whether he meant it to describe what heaven and hell are actually like or to make the larger point that people who are stubborn in their rejection of God will continue to be stubborn regardless of how much instruction they receive.

As Norman Geisler points out, though, "terms like 'down' and 'outside' are relational terms, not necessarily spatial ones. God is 'up' and hell is 'down.' God is 'inside' and hell is 'outside.' Hell is the other direction from God."<sup>29</sup> J. P. Moreland and Gary Habermas summarize what Scripture's references to hell, taken together, imply:

> The Bible's picture of hell, therefore, indicates that upon death some people will be translated into a different, nonspatial mode of existence. They will be conscious, and they will await a resurrection of their bodies, at which time they will be banished from heaven and secured in hell where they will experience unending, conscious exclusion from God, his people, and anything of value. This banishment will include conscious sorrow, shame, and anguish to differing degrees, depending on the person's life on earth.<sup>30</sup>

### Did Jesus Teach about Hell?

Bertrand Russell, mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, rejected Christianity for reasons that, as we have seen in this book, are unwarranted. But he was right about one thing: Jesus did teach about hell. In fact, Jesus is quoted speaking about hell more than anyone else in the Bible. According to authors Sean McDowell and Jonathan Morrow, "He saw no contradiction between the offer of love and forgiveness on one hand and the reality of hell as a place of eternal punishment on the other. Whatever your ultimate verdict on Jesus as the

<!-- page-385 -->

Son of God, the fact that he practiced what he preached is beyond reasonable doubt, giving him substantial moral credibility."<sup>31</sup>

Not only did Jesus teach about hell, but he is the one who used the figures of speech of fire, darkness, punishment, banishment from God's presence, and God's wrath.<sup>32</sup> Jesus mentioned hell in the Sermon on the Mount and in many parables. As authors Kenneth Boa and Robert Bowman argue,

> Impartial tests of authenticity prove that the teaching about Hell in the Gospels does indeed originate from Jesus himself. Given that Jesus said the kinds of things about Hell recorded in the Gospels, some people today need to revise their view of Jesus. The idea of Jesus as an easy-going fellow who just loved everybody and said only positive, uplifting things is a complete myth. Christian faith, if it is to be faithful to Christ, must acknowledge the reality of Hell.<sup>33</sup>

Many people just can't fathom Jesus talking about, much less believing in, hell. But if hell is real, failing to warn people about it would be callous. Yet many find it inconsistent for Jesus to teach about hell and also teach about mercy. They fail to see that this is precisely the point: the one who is quoted the most about hell is also the one who gave his own life so that no one would have to go there. As we will see, the work of Christ was an expression of God's justice and mercy, which delicately and beautifully intertwine like the two strands in a DNA double helix.

### Is Suffering in Hell Physical or Spiritual?

When people read the biblical passages about hell and judgment, they tend to think of it as something a person would experience with the kind of bodies we have now. As Geisler notes, Scripture says that after this life is over, people still have imperishable physical bodies (John 5:28–29; Rev. 20:13–15).<sup>34</sup> Yet if we take the figures of speech about hell as completely physical, they seem confusing. Hell has flames yet is complete darkness. It is a place where people remain but is also bottomless so that those who go there—physically, anyway—would never stop falling. Geisler believes that these references are intended as figures of speech to describe hell's torment rather than its physical conditions. "While everything in the Bible is literally true, not everything is true literally," he says. "For instance, God is not a literal rock (Psalm 18:2),<sup>35</sup> since He is Spirit (John 4:24),<sup>36</sup> but it is literally true that He is a solid, rocklike foundation we can trust."<sup>37</sup> So does this mean that hell is as much a form of spiritual as physical suffering? Boa and Bowman seem to think so:

> Jesus says that wicked people will be sent away "into the eternal fire prepared for the devil and his angels" (Matt. 25:41). Since the Devil and his angels are spiritual beings, not physical beings, Jesus' statement can only mean that the "eternal fire" is a form of punishment designed for spiritual beings. The implication is that the suffering of the condemned human beings in Hell will also be a spiritual type of suffering. It will consist of spiritual or mental anguish, perhaps in the form of regret, an abiding sense of loss, and the devastation of permanent exile from God, the world, and all that is good, beautiful, whole, and meaningful.<sup>38</sup>

<!-- page-386 -->

Though we have physical bodies and apparently will for all of eternity, the worst part of punishment in hell might be spiritual, not physical, pain.

### Is Hell Forever?

The Bible describes hell as a place that is everlasting, or eternal. Daniel 12:2 says, "Many of those who sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt." In Matthew 25:41–46, Jesus explains in a parable what will happen at the end of all things:

> He will say to those on his left, "Depart from me, you cursed, into the eternal fire prepared for the devil and his angels. For I was hungry and you gave me no food, I was thirsty and you gave me no drink, I was a stranger and you did not welcome me, naked and you did not clothe me, sick and in prison and you did not visit me." Then they also will answer, saying, "Lord, when did we see you hungry or thirsty or a stranger or naked or sick or in prison, and did not minister to you?" Then he will answer them, saying, "Truly, I say to you, as you did not do it to one of the least of these, you did not do it to me." And these will go away into eternal punishment, but the righteous into eternal life.

Of course, the words *eternal* and *everlasting* are used a number of different ways in Scripture, so it isn't always easy to discern what they mean in reference to hell, but the passage from Matthew 25 indicates that eternal punishment for those who did evil and failed to act righteously is paralleled with eternal life for the righteous. Whatever hell is, it is an experience that continues for an unimaginably long time.

## 3. What Is the Purpose of Hell?

Throughout the New Testament, we see God's *love* presented in context with God's *wrath*. Ephesians 2:4–5 says, "God, being rich in mercy, because of the great love with which he loved us, even when we were dead in our trespasses, made us alive together with Christ." Even the beloved verse John 3:16 ("For God so loved the world that he gave his only Son") is followed by verse 19, "And this is the judgment: the light has come into the world, and people loved the darkness rather than the light because their works were evil." So what are the implications of this for the doctrine of hell? Is God mad?

The biblical diagnosis for the human condition is not that we have been sinned against and are therefore justified in creating a god in our own image; rather, it's that we've rejected the God in whose image we are made and have fallen into sin. From a spiritual standpoint, we need salvation from our sin and its consequences.

Adherents to a Christian worldview recognize how difficult it is to fully understand the nature and character of a transcendent God. Through the biblical narrative, however, we can clearly see that God is described as a creator, a ruler, and a redeemer. His attributes include truth, justice, and love. For many, this seems like a contradiction: How can God be loving, just, compassionate, and wrathful at the same time?

<!-- page-387 -->

When you think about it, however, we often see these traits together among humans in a perfectly natural way:

- A mother shows her love for her child by forcefully opposing a would-be molester.
- A missionary demonstrates his love for the oppressed by offering a no-holds-barred testimony against those who kidnap children and force them to be soldiers.
- A district attorney expresses her love for justice by passionately arguing for strict punishment for a criminal who terrorized a neighborhood.

How can a God who doesn't exercise justice ever truly express love? Imagine a Nuremberg judge saying to Nazi Rudolf Höss, who murdered so many concentration-camp victims, "Because of love, I overlook your offense." It would be an outrage because justice involves setting things right. The failure to do so is called *injustice*, not love. The point of Scripture is not that God fails to exercise justice but that he laid on Christ the iniquity of us all (Isa. 53:6).<sup>39</sup> As author Randy Alcorn puts it, "To fear and dread Hell is understandable, but to argue against Hell is to argue against justice."<sup>40</sup>

> **Justice:** the act of making things legally and morally right.

Yet God goes a step further: he expresses both love and wrath toward *the same people*. Why? Because Scripture indicates that all human beings are self-righteous, thinking we can bear our own image rather than God's. To this point, theologian D. A. Carson says,

> God's wrath is not an implacable blind rage. However emotional it may be, it is an entirely reasonable and willed response to offenses against His holiness. At the same time His love wells up amidst His perfections and is not generated by the loveliness of the loved. Thus there is nothing intrinsically impossible about wrath and love being directed toward the same individual or people at once. God in His perfections must be wrathful against His rebel image-bearers, for they have offended Him; God in His perfections must be loving toward His rebel image-bearers, for He is that kind of God.<sup>41</sup>

So how can God's love and his wrath be reconciled? Scripture is clear: God is unalterably wrathful against anything that mars his image in those who should bear it.

With this background in mind, we can see a purpose for hell. As Kenneth Boa and Robert Bowman phrase it,

> The purpose of Hell is not to make those who go there better people or to help them see the error of their ways and come to repentance. Hell is not like the Betty Ford Clinic [a treatment center for those with addictions]. It is not even like a modern prison, where most prisoners are encouraged to become rehabilitated so that they may reenter society as useful citizens. The purpose of Hell is to punish sinners. It is about retribution, not restoration. The evidence for this thesis in the New Testament

<!-- page-388 -->

> is beyond reasonable challenge. God's final disposition toward the wicked is consistently described throughout the New Testament as one of anger and wrath (Matt. 3:7; 18:34; Luke 3:7; John 3:36; Rom. 2:5, 8–9; 5:9; 9:22; Eph. 2:3; 5:6; Col. 3:6; 1 Thess. 1:10; 5:9; Rev. 6:16–17; 14:10; 19:15).<sup>42</sup>

This assessment seems harsh, but in reality it is good news. In fact, it is *the* good news. It's laudable when someone is saved from a poor self-image or a wretched upbringing or suddenly feels God's presence or is able to overcome an addiction.

> The good news of the gospel is that Jesus died to satisfy God's wrath so that his decaying image bearers, and the creation they brutalized, may be restored. *The* good news is that by trusting in that sacrifice, we may know Christ and reflect his character in all of culture.

But the good news of the gospel is much more than this. The good news of the gospel is that Jesus died to satisfy God's wrath so that his decaying image bearers, and the creation they brutalized, may be restored. *The* good news is that by trusting in that sacrifice, we may know Christ and reflect his character in all of culture.

In short, I can't atone for the sin of the kid who beat me up in grade school, but I am accountable for my bitterness, pent-up anger, lack of forgiveness, and resentment. He threw a punch, but in my mind I wished him dead. I don't know where he stands with God, but I know I stand in desperate need of salvation, for I have been, and am, desperately wicked.

Still, hell seems like overkill. Most people just aren't that bad. Is the biblical teaching on hell just?

## 4. Is Hell Just?

Most people understand that sin must be punished, but the punishment of hell may seem too severe for the crime. How can someone's seemingly minor sins in a finite lifetime earn an eternity in hell? Couldn't God arrange for people's souls to be annihilated after just a brief punishment or even give them a chance to repent after they see how bad hell is?

Pastor Tim Keller addresses the misunderstanding from which these questions proceed:

> Modern people inevitably think hell works like this: God gives us time, but if we haven't made the right choices by the end of our lives, he casts our souls into hell for all eternity. As the poor souls fall through space, they cry out for mercy, but God says "Too late! You had your chance! Now you will suffer!" This caricature misunderstands the very nature of evil. The Biblical picture is that sin separates us from the presence of God, which is the source of all joy and indeed of all love, wisdom, or good things of any sort. Since we were originally created for God's immediate presence, only before his face will we thrive, flourish, and achieve our highest potential.<sup>43</sup>

The desire to be free of God's immediate presence is what sin is all about. We cannot assume that those who reject Christ will come to their senses and change once in hell. People continue to sin there. Their rebellion has not ceased. They still don't want God. Carson says, "Perhaps we

<!-- page-389 -->

should think of hell as a place where people continue to rebel, continue to insist on their own way, continue societal structures of prejudice and hate, continue to defy the living God. And as they continue to defy God, so he continues to punish them. And the cycle goes on and on and on."<sup>44</sup>

Whether or not people continue rebelling against God for all of eternity, their sin—and ours—does constitute an eternal debt. English poet and cleric John Donne said, "When all is done, the hell of hells, the torment of torments, is the everlasting absence of God, and the everlasting impossibility of returning to his presence.... To fall out of the hands of the living God, is a horror beyond our expression, beyond our imagination."<sup>45</sup>

> Whether or not people continue rebelling against God for all of eternity, their sin—and ours—does constitute an eternal debt.

To the Christian worldview, anything good we have or understand is because of God's constant presence in our lives. Yet we are constantly tempted to believe *we* are the ones who make our lives good, so our minor indiscretions should be seen in this context. We think we're like the football quarterback who throws an interception but who also completes several touchdown passes: an interception is bad, but touchdowns make up for it. Similarly, we think that because of all the good we've done, our rebellion against the creator and redeemer of the universe isn't all that serious. But Randy Alcorn states bluntly,

> We hate Hell precisely because we don't hate evil. We hate it also because we deserve it. We cry out for true and lasting justice, then fault God for taking evil too seriously by administering eternal punishment. We can't have it both ways. Sin is evil; just punishment of sin is good. Hell is an eternal correction of and compensation for evil. It is justice.<sup>46</sup>

It is a human temptation to think that we are good because we are not as bad as some other people we can think of. This view obscures the truth and makes our need for redemption seem like a choice of drinks at Starbucks: "You have a cup of Buddhism, and I'll take the Christianity—no big deal." Hell is the bracing reminder that the choice is ultimately not ours. As British theologian Lesslie Newbigin said, "It is one of the weaknesses of a great deal of contemporary Christianity that we do not speak of the last judgment and of the possibility of being finally lost."<sup>47</sup>

## 5. Ultimately, Those Who Go to Hell Know Why They're There

When all of the scriptural evidence and analysis is woven together, we arrive at a conclusion that startles many. Hell is not something foisted upon unsuspecting innocents but a place where the unrepentant finally get what they want: to be apart from God. A drowning person who refuses a life ring will have no righteous cause for blaming the lifeguard for his predicament. As Christian philosopher Dallas Willard put it,

> No one chooses in the abstract to go to hell or even to be the kind of person who belongs there. But their orientation toward self leads them to become the kind of

<!-- page-390 -->

> person for whom away-from-God is the only place for which they are suited. It is a place they would, in the end, choose for themselves, rather than come to humble themselves before God and accept who he is. Whether or not God's will is infinitely flexible, the human will is not. There are limits beyond which it cannot bend back, cannot turn or repent. One should seriously inquire if to live in a world permeated with God and the knowledge of God is something they themselves truly desire. If not, they can be assured that God will excuse them from his presence. They will find their place in the "outer darkness" of which Jesus spoke. But the fundamental fact about them will not be that they are there, but that they have become people so locked into their own self-worship and denial of God that they cannot want God.<sup>48</sup>

> We do not know at what age or due to what level of sinfulness people establish their destiny in this way, but it does seem that over the course of their lives, people establish their destination much as a railroad building crew lays down railroad track.

We do not know at what age or due to what level of sinfulness people establish their destiny in this way, but it does seem that over the course of their lives, people establish their destination much as a railroad building crew lays down railroad track. With each bit of track, the destination becomes nearer and the willingness to change course diminishes. It's not that they can't turn around and come back; it's that they just don't want to.

Tim Keller says that "hell is simply one's freely chosen identity apart from God on a trajectory into infinity."<sup>49</sup> He likens this choice to that of an addiction to alcohol, gambling, or pornography. People first choose addictions, but then those addictions take control and life disintegrates into a frantic obsession for sustaining the same level of high. At first, addicts see themselves as in control of their behavior ("I can quit any time"). Gradually, they submit control to the addiction and feel more isolated and sorry for themselves ("No one understands!"). "Personal disintegration happens on a broader scale," says Keller. "In eternity, this disintegration goes on forever. There is increasing isolation, denial, delusion, and self-absorption."<sup>50</sup>

Alcorn reminds us, "Hell is not pleasant, appealing, or encouraging. But Hell is morally good, because a good God must punish evil. Hell will not be a blot on the universe, but an eternal testimony to the ugliness of evil that will prompt wondrous appreciation of a good God's magnificence."<sup>51</sup> Evil, disintegration, and the obsession with self-salvation simply have no place in the new heavens and the new earth, covered as these are with the personal presence of God.

## 6. Why Can't God Just Forgive Everyone?

Many people will say, "All right, I can see how people who go to hell choose to go there. But surely because God knows this is a bad choice and we are too limited to see the full implications of what we are deciding, why doesn't he just forgive us?"

Again, we need to go back to understanding what good and evil actually are and therefore what it means to condone evil as opposed to forgiving it. In *The Problem of Pain*, C. S. Lewis said, "To condone an evil is simply to ignore it, to treat it as if it were good. But forgiveness

<!-- page-391 -->

needs to be accepted as well as offered if it is to be complete; a man who admits no guilt can accept no forgiveness."<sup>52</sup>

Our human dilemma is clear: although we want to believe that good and evil actually exist, and that God cares enough to deal with the desperately evil people such as Hitler and Stalin, we want God to overlook our own offenses. We each tend to draw the line between good and evil in such a way that we always fall on the "good" side. But this makes us the ones who decide the differences between good and evil. The distinction between good and evil either exists objectively or it does not. If it does, it exists according to God's terms, not ours. If it does not exist, then we are never in a position to say with certainty that other people, even evil dictators who killed millions, are evil and worthy of judgment. Our desire for judgment would be just a matter of preference. Mao Tse-tung was responsible for the deaths of seventy-two million people. Who's to say this was a bad thing? Maybe those people needed to die. The necessary implication of denying the objective difference between good and evil is that the concepts lose their meaning completely.

> The necessary implication of denying the objective difference between good and evil is that the concepts lose their meaning completely.

Even if we do not like the implications, we are far better off acknowledging the existence of objective good and evil even if it means we need to repent. As authors Sean McDowell and Jonathan Morrow put it, "The final proof that God is a perfect moral being, not indifferent to questions of right and wrong, is the fact that he has committed himself to judge the world. Since all of us expect this level of moral integrity and consistency from human judges, shouldn't we at least expect the same from God?"<sup>53</sup>

But if God is loving, how can he also be so angry at the bad things we do? We ask this question because we struggle with understanding exactly how God's love and his justice perfectly coexist in his nature. Tim Keller's explanation is helpful:

> In Christianity God is both a God of love and of justice. Many people struggle with this. They believe that a loving God can't be a judging God. Like most other Christian ministers in our society, I have been asked literally thousands of times, "How can a God of love be also a God ... filled with wrath and anger? If he is loving and perfect, he should forgive and accept everyone. He shouldn't get angry." I always start my response by pointing out that all loving persons are sometimes filled with wrath, not just despite of but because of their love. If you love a person and you see someone ruining them—even they themselves—you get angry.<sup>54</sup>

The coexistence of love and justice in God's nature makes it so that he can *forgive*, not just *ignore*, our sin. The apostle Paul proclaims in Romans 3:23–25, "All have sinned and fall short of the glory of God, and are justified by his grace as a gift, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus, whom God put forward as a propitiation by his blood, to be received by faith." How is this so? Paul continues with an allusion to the Passover in Egypt, when God withheld judgment from those who deserved it by an act of his divine will: "This was to show God's righteousness, because in his divine forbearance he had passed over former sins. It was to

<!-- page-392 -->

show his righteousness at the present time, so that he might be just and the justifier of the one who has faith in Jesus" (Rom. 3:25–26).

## 7. Answers to Tough Questions about Hell

If you've ever been in a discussion about hell, you've probably heard a lot of questions raised—good questions. Good people who love God have examined these questions and have arrived at different answers, so we need to reason carefully and prayerfully on each question.

### Does God Send Children to Hell?

If everyone who has lived since the fall of humanity possesses a sin nature, babies are sinners from the moment of conception. Even adults who are mentally disabled are still sinners in need of Christ's redemption. Are such people bound for hell? To answer this question, we need to distinguish between what it means to have a sin nature and what it means to be capable of sinful deeds of the sort that would lead to eternal judgment.

Theologian and pastor John MacArthur believes that this distinction is important and that it implies that those who are innocent of willful sin and rebellion will be saved. He says,

> Yes, all children who die before they reach a state of moral awareness and culpability in which they understand their sin and corruption—so that their sins are deliberate—are graciously saved eternally by God through the work of Jesus Christ. They are counted as elect by sovereign choice because they are innocent of willful sin, rebellion, and unbelief, by which works they would be justly condemned to eternal punishment.<sup>55</sup>

What is the biblical basis for this position? Well, first, it is clear from Scripture that if we call on God for salvation in Christ, we are judged according to Christ's work on the cross. Titus 3:5–7 says,

> He saved us, not because of works done by us in righteousness, but according to his own mercy, by the washing of regeneration and renewal of the Holy Spirit, whom he poured out on us richly through Jesus Christ our Savior, so that being justified by his grace we might become heirs according to the hope of eternal life.

When we rely on our own works to save us, we are judged by our own criterion. Revelation 20:13 says, "The sea gave up the dead who were in it, Death and Hades gave up the dead who were in them, and they were judged, each one of them, according to what they had done."

That people will be judged according to what they have done is a theme running throughout Scripture. Psalm 62:12 says of God, "You will render to a man according to his work." Proverbs 24:12 says, "Will he not repay man according to his work?" Speaking of his own return, Jesus says, "He will repay each person according to what he has done" (Matt. 16:27). The apostle Paul is also clear: "He will render to each one according to his works" (Rom. 2:6) and "We must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, so that each one may receive what is due for what he has done in the body, whether good or evil" (2 Cor. 5:10).

<!-- page-393 -->

How do these passages relate to the question of whether children or the mentally disabled will be saved? The answer, at least as far as can be discerned from the handful of Scripture passages we have to go by, is that there is an age at which children become capable of believing in the redemptive work of Christ or demonstrating their rejection of it. This is not to say that belief *causes* salvation but that it is a medium through which salvation occurs.<sup>56</sup> The Holy Spirit enables us to turn from idolatry, be declared righteous by God, and advance in holiness as we become like Christ. But it is to say that for a person to be punished for sin, he must be capable of embracing evil and also understanding the reason for the punishment.

> Bible scholars assume that such a distinction exists between those who are guilty because they are capable of choosing evil and knowing that this choice implies punishment and those who are not.

Bible scholars assume that such a distinction exists between those who are guilty because they are capable of choosing evil and knowing that this choice implies punishment and those who are not. Deuteronomy 1:39<sup>57</sup> refers to children qualifying for the Promised Land as grown-ups because they "have no knowledge of good or evil." Isaiah 7:15–16<sup>58</sup> refers to a timeline of destruction that would occur before the one referred to in the passage "knows how to refuse the evil and choose the good." In Romans 9:11,<sup>59</sup> Paul refers to Isaac's children who were chosen by God "though they were not yet born and had done nothing either good or bad." When King David's son died, David expressed confidence that his son would go to wherever the righteous dead go: "I shall go to him, but he will not return to me" (2 Sam. 12:23).

Perhaps a better way to understand what happens to children who die is to return to what the Bible says about God's character, specifically his grace. According to the apostle Paul, sin proceeds from our nature, not just from our acts (see, for example, Rom. 14:14–20).<sup>60</sup> Salvation comes through grace (Eph. 2:8–9).<sup>61</sup> Does God's grace apply to children and others who are incapable of spiritual reasoning? Of course. And throughout the Gospels, we see signs of Jesus's special grace for those of childlike innocence. Jesus had a special place for children in his ministry (see Matt. 19:14; also Luke 17:2, where Jesus harshly condemned anyone who would lead little ones into sin).<sup>62</sup>

Except for the passage from David, none of the passages we've quoted is about eternal destiny. But writing under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, these authors offer a picture of how God approaches children that gives us reason to hope. Children rely on God's grace; so does everyone else.

### What about Those Who Have Never Heard about Jesus?

"So what about those who have never heard?" It may be one of the most asked questions about the doctrine of hell and the one that worries people the most. It just doesn't seem fair that people who have never had the opportunity to hear the gospel would be condemned to an eternity in hell.

Before I attempt to answer the question, I always try to figure out the questioner's motivation: "Do you really want to know, or are you just offering this question as an accusation against Christianity?" The actual answer is quite simple: We can't know what God will do in

<!-- page-394 -->

every circumstance because the mind of God is a mystery. But Scripture tells us that God is gracious and just, so whatever the gracious and just thing is, that is what he will do. Still, Jesus commands us to go and tell the good news throughout the earth, and when he says go, he means go. It is exciting to see how in our own time, God works directly as well as through ease of travel and technology to enable the spreading of the good news. Many have come to faith through visions and dreams, and millions have come to faith through missionary outreaches, radio programs, Bible distributions, television, and the Internet.<sup>63</sup>

Jonathan Morrow helps us think through the issue of "those who have never heard" by looking at what the Bible says about God's nature and character:<sup>64</sup>

- God is compassionate and just (Gen. 18:25; Deut. 32:4; Pss. 7:9; 85:11; 89:14; 145:8–9; Rev. 16:7).
- The basis of our condemnation is sin, and all are in need of a savior (Rom. 3:10–18, 23; 5:12–21; 6:23; Eph. 2:1–3).
- Jesus Christ is the only means of salvation (John 14:6; Acts 4:12; 1 Tim. 2:5; 4:10; 1 John 2:2) and the only way to God.
- Since the time following the resurrection of Jesus, no one can be saved apart from the knowledge of Christ (Acts 16:31; Rom. 10:14; Acts 17:30-31).
- God genuinely desires all to be saved (Ezek. 18:23; John 3:16; 1 Tim. 2:3–6; 2 Pet. 3:9).
- God has revealed himself to the whole world both in creation (Ps. 19:1–2; Acts 14:15–17; Rom. 1:19–20) and human conscience (Eccles. 3:11; Rom. 2:14–16) so that people are without excuse.
- God's Spirit is at work convicting the world of sin, righteousness, and judgment (John 16:8–11).
- Christians are commanded to take the gospel to the whole world (Matt. 28:19–20; Acts 1:8).
- God has providentially arranged the world so that people might seek him and that everyone who seeks him will find him (Acts 17:24–28; cf. Heb. 11:6; Jer. 29:13; Acts 10:35).
- There will be people from every tribe, tongue, and nation in God's eternal kingdom (Rev. 25:31–46; 2 Thess. 1:7–9).
- The awful reality of hell indicates that not everyone is saved in the end (Matt. 10:28; 25:31–46; 2 Thess. 1:7–9).
- There is no second chance after death to accept the gospel (Heb. 9:27).<sup>65</sup>

<!-- page-395 -->

These references display a fairly clear pattern: all humans stand condemned before God, and this condemnation is based on their sins, not on what they do or do not know.

Once a person asked me, "But if people aren't condemned until they have knowledge of God, aren't they better off to remain without knowledge?" Initially, the question struck me as arrogant and racist, as if the person were saying, "As an 'enlightened Westerner,' I think we should not help the poor natives. They're happier the way they are and are best just left alone." First, people who have not heard the gospel are not like little children who are safe in their ignorance. Christianity says that everyone needs to know the gospel. It is the only way to God. And Jesus specifically commands us to share it throughout the entire world. To use a theological nuance—that we aren't sure who are condemned or not based on what they do or do not know—is to ignore an explicit command of Jesus and is gross misuse of Scripture and dangerously disobedient to God.

The more I thought about it, however, I realized that the person was asking a genuinely valid question. So my answer was this: we do not know whether people who have never heard the gospel will be saved. We do know two things: God is just and no one is beyond his reach, and God is gracious in saving many who deserve to be condemned. As Morrow phrases it, "We are left with some mystery when it comes to saying exactly how God will work out His plan of salvation among the nations. Therefore we trust ultimately in His goodness and justice. Will not the judge of the earth do right?"<sup>66</sup>

Second, we are commanded by Jesus to spread the good news, not because we have superior knowledge but because all authority in heaven and on earth has been given to him and, in this authority, he has commanded us to do it (Matt. 28:18–20).<sup>67</sup> Our mission is not to enlighten the ignorant but rather to call everyone in the world to repentance (Acts 17:30).<sup>68</sup> Dallas Willard expands on this point: "We should be very sure that the ruined soul is not one who has missed a few more or less important theological points and will flunk a theological examination at the end of life. Hell is not an 'oops!' or a slip. One does not miss heaven by a hair, but by constant effort to avoid and escape God."<sup>69</sup> We can see in creation that God exists as creator, but without specific revelation from God, each will remain, as Willard puts it, "disastrously in error about their own life and their place before God and man."<sup>70</sup> It is this error Jesus confronts, not a lack of theological knowledge.

### Doesn't Everyone Eventually Escape Hell?

A few years ago, an evangelical pastor named Rob Bell wrote a book that was propelled to bestseller status by the controversy it ignited. *Love Wins: A Book about Heaven, Hell, and the Fate of Everyone Who Ever Lived* was discussed on television, in the pages of *USA Today*, and on the cover of *Time* magazine, a publication that called Rob a "rock star" among evangelicals.

Bell is an excellent communicator. With a quick wit and a gift for bringing the Bible to life for both seekers and longtime believers, he relishes charging straight into its mouth of controversy. This has earned him a reputation as a fearless, though sometimes prickly, voice of a new generation of Christians.

In his book, Bell says that the main thing that keeps people away from Christianity is that they don't feel good about a God who would condemn the unrepentant to hell. To help people

<!-- page-396 -->

feel better, he argues that God's love will eventually woo everyone, and because that isn't (to his way of thinking) happening here on earth, God must have some kind of plan for saving people after they die. This is a form of **universalism:** the belief that everyone will ultimately be saved, even if salvation takes place after death.

> **Universalism:** the belief that all human and angelic beings will eventually be restored to a right relationship with God, either while alive or sometime after death.

Bell gives the strong impression that the doctrine of hell is the main thing evangelical churches emphasize today. Through carefully chosen, shocking examples, Bell takes his stand against what he sees as heartless and socially inept yahoos who get a perverse pleasure out of knowing that others will get punished in the afterlife. Though the subtitle implies that his book is about who goes to heaven and who goes to hell, it is really about whether people who have rejected Christ will be wooed to salvation after they die. Bell develops this theory to remove the excuses people use to dismiss Christianity.

That Jesus satisfies God's justice is one of the key themes of Scripture and one that Bell explicitly rejects ("We do not need to be rescued from God"). In fact, he blames "inquisitions, persecutions, trials, book burnings, blacklisting" on those who disagree with his stated position, calling them "misguided" and "toxic."<sup>71</sup>

The idea that God will eventually convert people beyond the grave is hopeful but also at odds with virtually everything we understand to be true from Scripture about death, salvation, and judgment. It's also confusing. How can we say that people are free to reject God in this lifetime but somehow after death they are no longer free? Is it consistent with God's nature and character to take no for an answer during a person's lifetime but force that person to "love" him after death, sort of like a cosmic stalker to whom no really means yes? As William Lane Craig says,

> No orthodox Christian likes the doctrine of hell or delights in anyone's condemnation. I truly wish universalism were true, but it is not. My compassion toward those in other world religions is therefore expressed, not in pretending that they are not lost and dying without Christ, but by supporting and making every effort myself to communicate to them the life-giving message of salvation through Christ.<sup>72</sup>

The apostle Paul says, "Knowing the fear of the Lord, we persuade others" (2 Cor. 5:11). Bell's *Love Wins* shows how far one kindhearted pastor is willing to go to avoid acknowledging the fear of the Lord or to avoid persuading others that they themselves are evil and need redemption. It is compassionate and well intentioned, but the scriptural evidence we have seen in this chapter simply does not support it.

### Aren't People's Souls Just Annihilated after Going to Hell?

Some Christians believe that lost souls are annihilated rather than tormented forever. Historically, early Christian apologist Justin Martyr seemed to believe this, and in our own day it has been defended by respected scholar John Stott.<sup>73</sup>

<!-- page-397 -->

The problem with this idea, called **annihilationism**, is that it doesn't fit Scripture very well. John 5:28–29<sup>74</sup> refers to the resurrection of the just and the unjust, which would be hard if the unjust had been annihilated. Also, the apostle Paul describes the punishment for the wicked as "eternal destruction," an active, ongoing state in 2 Thessalonians. This eternal destruction is "away" from God's ongoing glory: it is an eternal destruction of a relationship rather than an annihilation.<sup>75</sup> Those who do not believe seem to be missing out in some conscious fashion from what those who accepted the gospel are experiencing.

> **Annihilationism:** the belief that damned souls are utterly destroyed rather than tormented in hell for eternity.

The idea that hell involves conscious suffering seems consistent with the passages on hell we explored earlier (Matt. 8:12; 22:13; 25:41; Mark 9:43–48; Jude v. 13; Rev. 22:14–15; and others).<sup>76</sup> Although we might hope that the suffering in hell would quickly come to an end, especially for those we personally love and care for, such a view is hard to square with scriptural teaching.

## 8. How to Respond to Those Who Are Offended

How should we respond to those who question the biblical doctrine of hell? My friend Sue Bohlin, from Probe Ministries in Dallas, demonstrates a thorough and yet compassionate approach in response to a letter she received from a sixteen-year-old Wiccan practitioner. Here is the letter:

> I am a 16. I was searching through the web when I found your web site on the Occult. Naturally I was interested so I read through it. I found all of the information to be quite intriguing. I am a practitioner of Wicca. I am a Wiccan. I have been for the past year. I am not a worshiper of Satan nor do I inflict bodily harm upon myself through rituals. I do not believe in one all mighty god, rather I believe in many gods and goddesses. I am a believer of faith, I worship all things, the dead, trees, inanimate or not. I do not use rituals to gain, or hinder others. I simply use them to help or support things I love, like a protection spell while a loved one is on a trip and away from the family. I also ask the Lord and Lady to look over a loved one as they make their last journey. I do not believe in Heaven or Hell. I believe in personal "heavens" and personal "hells." Your site has given me the impression that your view is that if you are not a pure Christian you are going to "hell." You must worship a certain way and do certain things to be "saved." Am I right in saying this? I was just wondering your personal views on Wiccanism. I am curious about your opinions. Please feel free to e-mail me back. I would greatly appreciate it.<sup>77</sup>

And here is Sue's reply:

> Thank you for taking the time to write us.
>
> Yes, you read our views correctly. What we believe is definitely not politically correct. We believe that there is one God, that He has interacted with our world (which He created), and that He communicated true truth to us. Part of that truth is that there is only one way to be reconciled to Him, and that is by trusting in His Son Jesus to save us from our sin problem and to equip us for life as He intended it in this world, and for heaven when we die.

<!-- page-398 -->

> We do realize that it is far more appealing to believe that there are many ways to God or god, however one defines him/her/it, all equally valid. However, just as you can't live in the real world under that type of "all preferences are equally valid, all truths are equally true" misbeliefs, we believe that spiritual reality doesn't abide by those lies either. For instance, many people say they believe that physical reality is mere illusion, but you don't find them meditating on railroad tracks. And many people say they create their own truth, but they all seem to agree that "red means stop" or they don't live too long!
>
> Let me try to reframe a common misunderstanding of hell. When Jesus was on earth, He claimed to be God. He said, "I am the way, the truth, and the life." One of the implications of that statement is that life is found in a relationship with Him. Apart from Jesus, there is no life, only death, which means separation from the source of life. Heaven isn't so much a place as it is the fullness of relationship with a real Person—God. So being "saved" is not about jumping through religious hoops; it is about being rescued from an eternity of destruction and death where people are separated from life, which is only found in Jesus.
>
> You said you don't believe in one almighty God, but various gods and goddesses. Are they real? What evidence do you have that they exist? If you are trusting in imaginary friends, wouldn't you want to know that? On the other hand, Jesus was a real, historical Person who made astounding claims that are ridiculous if they are not true, and the only way to be reconciled to God if they are. (He also said He was the only way to the Father. Again, that is an arrogant and presumptuous thing to say—unless it's true.)
>
> So hell is not a place where an angry, vengeful God laughs as he sends people who wouldn't jump through his hoops. Hell exists because God made us to be in a love relationship with Him, and He will not, cannot, force us to love Him. It has to be freely chosen. Since life is only found in God, hell is the place for people who would not accept His offer of love and friendship. And since there is no life apart from God, hell is a place of everlasting death and destruction because there is no life where there is no relationship with God.
>
> You asked about our view of Wicca: it is not the same as Satanism, but it is another false religion based on lies and misbeliefs that are designed to draw people away from the true God. We believe that Wicca ultimately comes from the mind of the literal, evil being called Satan who hates God and hates people and lies to them so that they will suffer like he does. And while you may well be a gentle, kind and wonderful person, the kind of person that all of us at Probe would love to have as our next-door neighbor, we believe that without a personal relationship with the one true God through His Son Jesus Christ, you cannot experience life as He intended for you to live in this life, your sins will separate you from a holy God forever, and you cannot go to heaven when you die.
>
> I do pray that because God loves you as much as He does, He will do whatever it takes to show Himself to you in a way that is sufficiently intimate to your heart that you will KNOW that it is Him pursuing you with a strong but gentle divine love. And I pray you will experience His blessing on your life.<sup>78</sup>

<!-- page-399 -->

Notice what Sue did and did not do. She did not mock her young correspondent's view. She did not avoid the distinct teaching of Scripture. She did, however, communicate clearly and compassionately. This is a model for how we ought to talk with people about hell.

## 9. Conclusion

As we have seen, people reject Christ because their hearts are desperately wicked. They prefer a counterfeit form of salvation because it maintains the illusion that they control their own destiny. Rejecting Christianity because one is offended by often clumsy arguments is an *excuse*, not a reason.

Those who will go to hell will know why they are there. They are in rebellion against God to the very end. C. S. Lewis put it this way: "I willingly believe that the damned are, in one sense, successful rebels to the end; that the doors of hell are locked on the inside."<sup>79</sup>

So how should we respond? First, recognize that most people don't take hell as seriously as they should. According to a survey by George Barna, only 1 percent of Americans actually think they're going to hell.<sup>80</sup> Why this low of a percentage? Because people don't think they're very bad. If they are trusting in themselves for salvation, however, they are making a tragic mistake.

> Although the doctrine of hell seems like very bad news at first glance, it is actually part of God's very good news: love does indeed win. God's perfect love wins. Good triumphs over evil.

Second, we as Christians need to become familiar with the biblical doctrines of heaven and hell. We need to demonstrate loving community and pray that the Holy Spirit will work in people's lives to bring about repentance.

So although the doctrine of hell seems like very bad news at first glance, it is actually part of God's very good news: love does indeed win. God's perfect love wins. Good triumphs over evil. Humanity is not doomed after all. This good news, based on the authority of Jesus, must be shared with everyone in the world.

We'll expand on this theme of God's goodness and the relationship between his love and his justice in the next chapter as we consider another common objection to the Bible: If God is love, why does he seem like such a mean bully in the Old Testament?

## Endnotes

1. Bertrand Russell, *Why I Am Not a Christian and Other Essays on Religion and Related Subjects* (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1957), 17–18.
2. Douglas Groothuis, *Christian Apologetics: A Comprehensive Case for Biblical Faith* (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity, 2011), 656.
3. Jonathan Edwards, "The Justice of God in the Damnation of Sinners," in *Works of President Edwards*, 4 vols. (New York: Leavitt & Allen, 1852), 4:228.
4. Groothuis, *Christian Apologetics*, 660.
5. Exodus 8:22: "On that day I will set apart the land of Goshen, where my people dwell, so that no swarms of flies shall be there, that you may know that I am the Lord in the midst of the earth"; Exodus 8:29–30: "Moses said, 'Behold, I am going out from you and I will plead with the Lord that the swarms of flies may depart from Pharaoh, from his servants, and from his people, tomorrow. Only let not Pharaoh cheat again by not letting the people go to sacrifice to the Lord.' So Moses went out from Pharaoh and prayed to the Lord."
6. Exodus 9:20: "Whoever feared the word of the Lord among the servants of Pharaoh hurried his slaves and his livestock into the houses."
7. Walter Kaiser, *Toward an Old Testament Theology* (Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 1978), 103–4. Exodus 12:38: "A mixed multitude also went up with them, and very much livestock, both flocks and herds."
8. C. S. Lewis, *Readings for Meditation and Reflection* (New York: HarperOne, 1996), 37. See also www.articles.sfgate.com/2002-07-06/news/17553634_1_evangelical-churches-portions-of-christian-theology.
9. Flannery O'Connor, *The Habit of Being: Letters of Flannery O'Connor* (New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 1979), 100.
10. 1 Thessalonians 1:10: "... to wait for his Son from heaven, whom he raised from the dead, Jesus who delivers us from the wrath to come."
11. Titus 3:5: "He saved us, not because of works done by us in righteousness, but according to his own mercy, by the washing of regeneration and renewal of the Holy Spirit."
12. Acts 15:3: "Being sent on their way by the church, they passed through both Phoenicia and Samaria, describing in detail the conversion of the Gentiles, and brought great joy to all the brothers."
13. Romans 3:24: "... are justified by his grace as a gift, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus."
14. Romans 8:15, 23: "You did not receive the spirit of slavery to fall back into fear, but you have received the Spirit of adoption as sons, by whom we cry, 'Abba! Father!'... And not only the creation, but we ourselves, who have the firstfruits of the Spirit, groan inwardly as we wait eagerly for adoption as sons, the redemption of our bodies."
15. Romans 15:16: "... to be a minister of Christ Jesus to the Gentiles in the priestly service of the gospel of God, so that the offering of the Gentiles may be acceptable, sanctified by the Holy Spirit."
16. These six aspects of salvation come from Robert A. Webb, *The Theology of Infant Salvation* (Harrisonburg, VA: Sprinkle Publications, 1992). Romans 8:17: "... if children, then heirs—heirs of God and fellow heirs with Christ, provided we suffer with him in order that we may also be glorified with him."
17. Colossians 3:6: "On account of these the wrath of God is coming."
18. 1 Thessalonians 1:10: "... to wait for his Son from heaven, whom he raised from the dead, Jesus who delivers us from the wrath to come."
19. Daniel 12:1–2: "At that time shall arise Michael, the great prince who has charge of your people. And there shall be a time of trouble, such as never has been since there was a nation till that time. But at that time your people shall be delivered, everyone whose name shall be found written in the book. And many of those who sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt."
20. Isaiah 66:24: "They shall go out and look on the dead bodies of the men who have rebelled against me. For their worm shall not die, their fire shall not be quenched, and they shall be an abhorrence to all flesh."
21. Morgan and Peterson reference dozens of verses they say constitute the doctrine of hell, including Matthew 5:22, 29–30; 7:13, 23; 8:12, 29; 10:28; 13:42, 49–50; 18:6–9, 22:13; 23:33; 24:51; 25:30, 41, 46; 26:24; Mark 1:24; 5:7; 9:43, 45, 47–48; Luke 3:17; 4:34; 5:28–29, 36; 5:28–29; 8:21, 24; Acts 10:42; 17:31; Romans 2:5, 8–9, 12; 6:23; 9:3, 22; 1 Corinthians 11:32; 2 Corinthians 2:15–16, 4:3; Galatians 1:8–9; 6:8; Ephesians 5:6; Philippians 1:28; 3:19; Colossians 3:6; 1 Thessalonians 1:10; 5:3, 9; Hebrews 6:2; 9:27; 10:27, 39; James 4:12; 2 Peter 2:1, 3, 4, 9, 12, 17; 3:7; Jude vv. 4, 6, 7, 13; and Revelation 2:11; 6:16–17; 11:18; 14:10–11, 19; 16:19; 17:8, 11; 18:8, 9, 18; 19:3, 15, 20; 20:10, 14–15; 21:8; 22:15. See Christopher W. Morgan and Robert A. Peterson, eds., *Hell Under Fire: Modern Scholarship Reinvents Eternal Punishment* (Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2004), 168.
22. Matthew 8:12: "The sons of the kingdom will be thrown into the outer darkness. In that place there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth"; Matthew 22:13: "The king said to the attendants, 'Bind him hand and foot and cast him into the outer darkness. In that place there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.'"
23. Revelation 22:14–15: "Blessed are those who wash their robes, so that they may have the right to the tree of life and that they may enter the city by the gates. Outside are the dogs and sorcerers and the sexually immoral and murderers and idolaters, and everyone who loves and practices falsehood."
24. Matthew 25:41: "He will say to those on his left, 'Depart from me, you cursed, into the eternal fire prepared for the devil and his angels.'"
25. Matthew 8:12: "The sons of the kingdom will be thrown into the outer darkness. In that place there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth"; Jude v. 13: "... wild waves of the sea, casting up the foam of their own shame; wandering stars, for whom the gloom of utter darkness has been reserved forever."
26. Mark 9:43–48: "If your hand causes you to sin, cut it off. It is better for you to enter life crippled than with two hands to go to hell, to the unquenchable fire. And if your foot causes you to sin, cut it off. It is better for you to enter life lame than with two feet to be thrown into hell. And if your eye causes you to sin, tear it out. It is better for you to enter the kingdom of God with one eye than with two eyes to be thrown into hell, 'where their worm does not die and the fire is not quenched.'"
27. Luke 16:28: "I have five brothers—so that he may warn them, lest they also come into this place of torment."
28. 2 Thessalonians 1:7–9: "... to grant relief to you who are afflicted as well as to us, when the Lord Jesus is revealed from heaven with his mighty angels in flaming fire, inflicting vengeance on those who do not know God and on those who do not obey the gospel of our Lord Jesus. They will suffer the punishment of eternal destruction, away from the presence of the Lord and from the glory of his might."
29. Norman L. Geisler, *If God, Why Evil? A New Way to Think about the Question* (Minneapolis: Bethany, 2011), 103.
30. J. P. Moreland and Gary R. Habermas, *Beyond Death: Exploring the Evidence for Immortality* (Eugene, OR: Wipf and Stock, 2003), 291.
31. Sean McDowell and Jonathan Morrow, *Is God Just a Human Invention? And Seventeen Other Questions Raised by the New Atheists* (Grand Rapids, MI: Kregel, 2010), 160.
32. Kenneth D. Boa and Robert M. Bowman, *Sense and Nonsense about Heaven and Hell* (Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2007), 99–100.
33. Boa and Bowman, *Sense and Nonsense*, 99–100.
34. John 5:28–29: "Do not marvel at this, for an hour is coming when all who are in the tombs will hear his voice and come out, those who have done good to the resurrection of life, and those who have done evil to the resurrection of judgment." Revelation 20:13–15: "The sea gave up the dead who were in it, Death and Hades gave up the dead who were in them, and they were judged, each one of them, according to what they had done. Then Death and Hades were thrown into the lake of fire. This is the second death, the lake of fire. And if anyone's name was not found written in the book of life, he was thrown into the lake of fire."
35. Psalm 18:2: "The Lord is my rock and my fortress and my deliverer, my God, my rock, in whom I take refuge, my shield."
36. John 4:24: "God is spirit, and those who worship him must worship in spirit and truth."
37. Geisler, *If God, Why Evil?*, 104.
38. Boa and Bowman, *Sense and Nonsense*, 115.
39. Isaiah 53:6: "All we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned—every one—to his own way; and the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all."
40. Randy C. Alcorn, *If God Is Good: Faith in the Midst of Suffering and Evil* (Colorado Springs, CO: Multnomah, 2009), 309.
41. D. A. Carson, "God's Love and God's Wrath," *Bibliotheca Sacra* 156 (1999): 388–90.
42. Boa and Bowman, *Sense and Nonsense*, 102.
43. Timothy J. Keller, *The Reason for God: Belief in an Age of Skepticism* (New York: Dutton, 2008), 76.
44. D. A. Carson, *How Long, O Lord? Reflections on Suffering and Evil* (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 1990), 102.
45. John Donne, quoted in D.A. Carson, *The Gagging of God: Christianity Confronts Pluralism* (Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 1996), 532.
46. Alcorn, *If God Is Good*, 309.
47. Lesslie Newbigin, "Confessing Christ in a Multi-Religion Society," *Scottish Bulletin of Evangelical Theology* 12 (1994): 130–31.
48. Dallas Willard, *Renovation of the Heart: Putting On the Character of Christ* (Colorado Springs, CO: NavPress, 2002), 57–59.
49. Keller, *The Reason for God*, 76.
50. Keller, *The Reason for God*, 76.
51. Alcorn, *If God Is Good*, 309.
52. Quoted in McDowell and Morrow, *Is God Just a Human Invention?*, 166–67 (emphasis mine).
53. McDowell and Morrow, *Is God Just a Human Invention?*, 166–67.
54. Keller, *The Reason for God*, 71.
55. John MacArthur, *Safe in the Arms of God: Truth from Heaven about the Death of a Child* (Nashville: Thomas Nelson, 2003), 90.
56. See Webb, *The Theology of Infant Salvation*.
57. Deuteronomy 1:39: "As for your little ones, who you said would become a prey, and your children, who today have no knowledge of good or evil, they shall go in there. And to them I will give it, and they shall possess it."
58. Isaiah 7:15–16: "He shall eat curds and honey when he knows how to refuse the evil and choose the good. For before the boy knows how to refuse the evil and choose the good, the land whose two kings you dread will be deserted."
59. Romans 9:11: "They were not yet born and had done nothing either good or bad—in order that God's purpose of election might continue, not because of works but because of him who calls."
60. Romans 14:14–20: "I know and am persuaded in the Lord Jesus that nothing is unclean in itself, but it is unclean for anyone who thinks it unclean. For if your brother is grieved by what you eat, you are no longer walking in love. By what you eat, do not destroy the one for whom Christ died. So do not let what you regard as good be spoken of as evil. For the kingdom of God is not a matter of eating and drinking but of righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Spirit. Whoever thus serves Christ is acceptable to God and approved by men. So then let us pursue what makes for peace and for mutual upbuilding. Do not, for the sake of food, destroy the work of God. Everything is indeed clean, but it is wrong for anyone to make another stumble by what he eats."
61. Ephesians 2:8–9: "By grace you have been saved through faith. And this is not your own doing; it is the gift of God, not a result of works, so that no one may boast."
62. Matthew 19:14: "Jesus said, 'Let the little children come to me and do not hinder them, for to such belongs the kingdom of heaven'"; Luke 17:2: "It would be better for him if a millstone were hung around his neck and he were cast into the sea than that he should cause one of these little ones to sin."
63. "The Bible clearly teaches that people are judged for their willful sins (Rev. 20:12–15; cf. Isa. 64:6–7; Matt. 5:48; 12:36; 2 Tim. 4:14; James 2:10–11) according to the standard of revelation they have received (Rom. 2:4–16; James 4:17). They are not condemned because a missionary never made it to them and they never heard the name of Jesus." Jonathan Morrow, "What about Those Who Have Never Heard about Jesus?" www.thinkchristianity.org/what-about-those-who-have-never-heard-about-jesus/.
64. Morrow, "What about Those."
65. Morrow, "What about Those."
66. Morrow, "What about Those."
67. Matthew 28:18–20: "Jesus came and said to them, 'All authority in heaven and on earth has been given to me. Go therefore and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, teaching them to observe all that I have commanded you. And behold, I am with you always, to the end of the age.'"
68. Acts 17:30: "The times of ignorance God overlooked, but now he commands all people everywhere to repent."
69. Willard, *Renovation of the Heart*, 57–59.
70. Willard, *Renovation of the Heart*, 57–59.
71. Rob Bell, *Love Wins: A Book about Heaven, Hell, and the Fate of Every Person Who Ever Lived* (New York: HarperOne, 2012), 183, viii.
72. William Lane Craig, "No Other Name: A Middle Knowledge Perspective on the Exclusivity of Salvation through Christ," in *The Philosophical Challenge of Religious Diversity*, ed. Philip L. Quinn and Kevin Meeker (New York: Oxford University Press, 2000), 52.
73. John Stott defends annihilationism but in an extremely cautious way. He says, "I find the concept [of eternal conscious punishment in hell] intolerable and do not understand how people can live with it without either cauterizing their feelings or cracking under the strain. But our emotions are a fluctuating, unreliable guide to truth and must not be exalted to the place of supreme authority in determining it. As a committed Evangelical, my question must be—and is—not what does my heart tell me, but what does God's word say?" See David L. Edwards and John R. W. Stott, *Essentials: A Liberal-Evangelical Dialogue* (London: Hodder & Stoughton, 1988), 314–15.
74. John 5:28–29: "Do not marvel at this, for an hour is coming when all who are in the tombs will hear his voice and come out, those who have done good to the resurrection of life, and those who have done evil to the resurrection of judgment."
75. 2 Thessalonians 1:9: "They will suffer the punishment of eternal destruction, away from the presence of the Lord and from the glory of his might."
76. Matthew 8:12: "The sons of the kingdom will be thrown into the outer darkness. In that place there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth"; Matthew 22:13: "The king said to the attendants, 'Bind him hand and foot and cast him into the outer darkness. In that place there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth'"; Matthew 25:41: "He will say to those on his left, 'Depart from me, you cursed, into the eternal fire prepared for the devil and his angels'"; Mark 9:43–48: "If your hand causes you to sin, cut it off. It is better for you to enter life crippled than with two hands to go to hell, to the unquenchable fire. And if your foot causes you to sin, cut it off. It is better for you to enter life lame than with two feet to be thrown into hell. And if your eye causes you to sin, tear it out. It is better for you to enter the kingdom of God with one eye than with two eyes to be thrown into hell, 'where their worm does not die and the fire is not quenched'"; Jude v. 13: "Wild waves of the sea, casting up the foam of their own shame; wandering stars, for whom the gloom of utter darkness has been reserved forever"; Revelation 22:14–15: "Blessed are those who wash their robes, so that they may have the right to the tree of life and that they may enter the city by the gates. Outside are the dogs and sorcerers and the sexually immoral and murderers and idolaters, and everyone who loves and practices falsehood."
77. "I Am a Wiccan: Are You Saying I'm Going to Hell?," May 27, 2002, www.probe.org/i-am-a-wiccan-are-you-saying-im-going-to-hell/. Spelling errors have been altered for the sake of readability.
78. "I Am a Wiccan."
79. C. S. Lewis, *The Problem of Pain* (New York: HarperSanFrancisco, 2001), 130 (emphasis in the original).
80. "Americans Describe Their Views about Life after Death," October 21, 2003, www.barna.org/barna-update/5-barna-update/128-americans-describe-their-views-about-life-after-death.
