<!-- page-405 -->
# Chapter 16: Is God a Mean Bully?

## 1. Is God Good?

Richard Dawkins, a former zoology professor at Oxford University, has made a name for himself as the world's most famous, most vocal critic of Christianity. At the beginning of the second chapter of his book *The God Delusion*, Dawkins writes,

> The God of the Old Testament is arguably the most unpleasant character in all fiction: jealous and proud of it; a petty, unjust, unforgiving control-freak; a

<!-- page-406 -->

> vindictive, bloodthirsty ethnic cleanser; a misogynistic, homophobic, racist, infanticidal, genocidal, filicidal, pestilential, megalomaniacal, sadomasochistic, capriciously malevolent bully.<sup>1</sup>

Dawkins quotes this line in his speeches and always gets a cheer from university students, presumably because it summarizes well what many students perceive to be the evils of Judaism and its largest offshoot, Christianity.

In this quotation, Dawkins is calling into question not so much whether the title "God" is appropriately applied to any being as whether God as named in the Old Testament is actually a moral being. It isn't a question of whether God exists but rather whether he is good.<sup>2</sup>

If what Dawkins says is true, it is certainly an embarrassing set of facts for Christians. On the other hand, is it possible he is overstating—or even misstating—the case and that his attack is just a smug, culturally insensitive applause line?

Obviously, Christianity's truth does not rest on what one seemingly cranky atheist writes, even if he is clever, and even if he writes it in a bestselling book. If there is any truth to these kinds of criticisms of Scripture, however, we need to know. If they are untrue, we ought to be able to explain why this is so.

Each of Dawkins's accusations condenses complex assumptions into apparently simple, self-evidently true words. But we have only one chapter in this volume in which to respond to these objections. Entire books have been written on the content of virtually every section in this chapter, and I encourage you to look at the authors and books cited in the references if you are interested in a more complete analysis.

In this chapter, we'll look at the implications of what we understand to be true about God in relation to four questions:

- Did God command genocide?
- Does God hate homosexuals?
- Does the Bible endorse slavery?
- Is the Bible oppressive to women?

In tackling these questions, we need to be careful not to reply to Dawkins with insults. We'll seek instead to approach each question in a culturally sensitive, historically informed manner that takes the Bible seriously. This might not stop critics in their tracks, but perhaps it will bring us nearer to the truth and remove a few barriers to genuine confidence in Scripture.

## 2. Understanding the God of the Old Testament from His Own Perspective

The Bible, as we've seen, presents God as having created a good world and a very good plan for his image bearers. Adam and Eve were given the significant calling of turning the entire earth into a garden while working in the loving, caring presence of their creator, yet,

<!-- page-407 -->

as we saw in our chapters on the metanarrative of Scripture, our first parents strayed. All of history from that point to this is of God seeking, finding, and winning back his image bearers. One of the fall's consequences is self-centeredness. It's tempting to view everything—even God's redemptive work—from our own perspective rather than from God's. Not only does self-centered thinking distort our grasp of the truth but, as authors Michael Goheen and Craig Bartholomew point out, "It is treason—not against a rightful yet distant authority but rather against a loving, generous, ever-present Father. It is life turned away from God's loving intention."<sup>3</sup>

Because humans cannot obtain a God's-eye view of the world, some think seeing things from our own perspective is all we can do. This is like trying to discover the extent of the Gobi Desert while we're in the middle of it rather than while viewing it through satellite photos. We're too close to see the big picture.

What if, through some kind of revelation from one who *can* see the big picture, we were able to rethink our questions about the world and our place in it? This is exactly what the Bible claims to do, and we've already seen an impressive amount of evidence that this claim is valid. But before we present robust answers to difficult questions, we should seek to understand what the Bible says God is like.

> **Pentateuch:** the first five books of the Bible (Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy).

The Old Testament begins with what we call the **Pentateuch** (*penta* meaning "five," and *teuch* meaning "scroll"): Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy. These five books show how God created, called out, taught, organized, and established a people holy for himself.

So what was God up to? Well, as we saw in our chapters on the metanarrative of Scripture, God rescued his people from slavery in Egypt and resettled them to form a nation. The early books of the Bible form their history lesson so they would know where they came from and how they were set free from Egypt. In them, we also find the civil, cultural, and religious laws by which God directed them to live. The people were called Israelites after a man, Israel, who, before God changed his name, had been called Jacob. Israel/Jacob was the son of Isaac, Isaac was the son of Abraham, and Abraham was the patriarch of the Jewish race.

So who is this God? As revealed in the Old Testament, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob is vastly different from the regional gods worshipped in the ancient Near East. According to authors Wayne House and Dennis Jowers, all of these nations had developed systems of worship to explain why seasons change, why weather seems beyond our control, why people are born, and why, in spite of our hopes, we all die.<sup>4</sup> For most of history, each generation of adults transmitted the received stories to the younger generation. According to writings we have from this time period, many of these gods displayed the characteristics of which Dawkins accuses the God of the Bible.

But the God of Israel was a complete contrast to these regional gods. Isaiah 40:18 asks, "To whom then will you liken God, or what likeness compare with him?" We can see this in at least five ways:

1. The God of the Bible is portrayed as the God of all peoples of the earth and not merely an ethnic or regional deity (Ps. 46:8–9, 1 Kings 8:60).<sup>5</sup>

<!-- page-408 -->

In the ancient Near East, gods operated in community—in a **pantheon**, a divine assembly, or with a consort. By contrast, the biblical God works alone and doesn't share his power or glory with another.<sup>6</sup>

> **Pantheon:** the collection of gods belonging to a particular religion or mythology.

2. As opposed to inanimate statues worshipped by pagan cultures of gods who were found in the cycles of nature and incapable of revealing themselves, the God of the Bible reveals himself as a *living* God—fifteen times in the Old Testament and thirteen times in the New Testament.<sup>7</sup>

3. Although other gods were incomprehensible to the people who worshipped them, the God of the Old Testament is portrayed as the Lord of history (Dan. 4:25, Isa. 41:1–10) who actually communicates truthfully with his worshippers. Habakkuk 2:18 asks, "What profit is an idol when its maker has shaped it, a metal image, a teacher of lies?"<sup>8</sup>

4. In contrast to lifeless idols, the God of the Bible desires conversation with his chosen people and reveals himself in miraculous events, divine speech, and incarnational acts. Isaiah 1:18 says, "'Come now, let us reason together,' says the Lord."<sup>9</sup>

5. The God of Israel also is the creator-God, not hiding himself but making himself known in all of his works. Romans 1:19 says, "What can be known about God is plain to them, because God has shown it to them."<sup>10</sup>

In light of these differences, it is no wonder that the ancient Israelites were told not to worship other gods or make images of them. Unlike other gods worshipped in the ancient Near East, the one true God did not need his image to be awakened, fed, washed, and put to bed to ensure his continued presence. Nor would God allow his name to be harnessed for the selfish purposes of his worshippers, as was common with regional deities.<sup>11</sup>

Clearly, the Bible's revelations about God stand in stark contrast to the fantastical tales of heavenly power struggles and misbehavior told of the other gods of other nations. As Wayne House and Dennis Jowers put it, "God was willing to *prove* His existence, power, and faithfulness to His covenant to those who were believers in Him and those who were not."<sup>12</sup>

> **Yahweh:** from the Hebrew for "I Am"; the personal and covenantal name of God used in the Old Testament.

So who did this God reveal himself to be? Scholar Walter Kaiser Jr. says that the primary name by which he reveals himself in the Old Testament is **Yahweh**, which means "I am." In other words, as Kaiser puts it, he was "the God who would be dynamically, effectively present when He was needed and when men called on Him."<sup>13</sup> In other words, God was known by his *character*: his attributes and qualities. This was not a static god about whom we tell outlandish stories but rather a dynamic, active, involved, *personal* God.<sup>14</sup>

The people of Israel were special to him. He describes them as follows:

1. His family (Exod. 4:22–23; Deut. 14:1).<sup>15</sup>

<!-- page-409 -->

2. His people; they had a national identity (Exod. 6:7; 19:6).<sup>16</sup>

3. His congregation; they were his flock (Exod. 12:3).<sup>17</sup>

4. His treasured possession (Exod. 19:5).<sup>18</sup>

5. Those he made holy (Deut. 7:6; 14:2; 26:18–19).<sup>19</sup>

6. A kingdom of priests, a holy nation (Exod. 19:3–6).<sup>20</sup>

Kaiser's summary is powerful: "Israel was to be separate and holy; she was to be separate and as no other people on the face of the earth. As an elect or called people now being formed into a nation under God, holiness was not an optional feature."<sup>21</sup> The Israelites had a special status. In essence, they were God's priests to the world.<sup>22</sup>

In a way, God set the children of Israel apart in the same way husbands and wives are set apart for one another, by marriage covenant, pledging to put their energy into the relationship rather than into other things and maintain the purity and integrity of the relationship as a means of bringing good to one another and to the world. Physically, nothing stops them from wasting their energy elsewhere or entering into sexual relations with others, but they refuse because of their commitment to their marriage covenant. Abiding by this choice cultivates the soil in which it is possible for lifelong love to grow.<sup>23</sup>

Seeing how Israel was set apart clears some of the fog away from the Old Testament. This is especially true with certain difficult passages in which Israel was commanded to kill those in the surrounding nations.

## 3. Why Would God Command His People to Wipe Out Entire People Groups?

> **Genocide:** the systematic killing of a particular racial, ethnic, or religious group.

Killing an entire people group is called **genocide**. If any person committed genocide, we would think it to be a heinous act. It's as simple as that. So why, many wonder, wouldn't God be judged accordingly? In fact, to this way of thinking, God's bigness only magnifies the cruelty. He's a bully.

Understanding the historical context may help us grapple with the question this section asks. As we discussed earlier, God brought his people out of Egypt and resettled them in an area that is occupied today by the modern nation of Israel and the territory of Palestine. For the people to settle and live there in peace, they first had to deal with two people groups, the Canaanites and the Amalekites, whose settlements and way of life posed a threat to their security and stability.

How were these surrounding nations a threat? God had promised Abraham a land where his people could settle so they could bring blessing to the nations. After leaving Egypt, they had no place to call their own. They were a minority culture in that land surrounded by wicked people who were morally and spiritually destructive. If the Israelites became like them, it would undermine God's saving purposes for the world. For Israel,

<!-- page-410 -->

idolatry and sexual immorality would be tantamount to acts of treason that would threaten the very identity of Israel itself. This created problems with the Canaanites and Amalekites. Let's look at each in turn.

### The Canaanites and Amalekites

From history, we know that the Canaanites openly lived the kind of lifestyle God wanted his chosen people to avoid. The Canaanites were given over to sexual deviance such as temple prostitution, incest, and bestiality as well as child sacrifice—acts which are serious, punishable crimes, not mere lifestyle variations. They worshipped deities such as Anath, patroness of sex and war, who was described as wading in blood up to her neck and washing her hands in human gore, all with a heart full of joy.<sup>24</sup>

Moloch is another god worshipped by the Canaanites. Here's how the *International Standard Bible Encyclopedia* describes Moloch worship:

> The image of Moloch was a human figure with a bull's head and outstretched arms, ready to receive the children destined for sacrifice. The image of metal was heated red hot by a fire kindled within, and the children laid on its arms rolled off into the fiery pit below. In order to drown the cries of the victims, flutes were played, and drums were beaten; and mothers stood by without tears or sobs, to give the impression of the voluntary character of the offering.<sup>25</sup>

These are not the kind of people who make good neighbors. It would be like moving to a community in which all the surrounding homes were occupied by sexual predators and serial killers.

The Amalekites, the other people group in the region, did more than just conduct wicked practices. They also dedicated themselves relentlessly to Israel's destruction. This dedication continued long after the Israelites were settled in their new territory. The Amalekites were like a neighborhood gang, always waiting around the corner to hurt the Israelites however they could. Haman, the man who wanted to destroy Esther's relative Mordecai (as recorded in the book of Esther) was an "Agagite," which means he was of the line of King Agag, who was an Amalekite (Esther 3:1; 1 Sam. 15). Continuing the tradition of his forefathers, Haman aimed to utterly wipe out the Jews.<sup>26</sup>

In 1 Samuel 14:48, we are told that Israel's king, Saul, responded to the Amalekites' plundering of Israel with a defensive military action in which the battle account (1 Sam. 15:8, 20)<sup>27</sup> says that Saul utterly destroyed all the people.

### What Does It Mean to "Utterly Destroy" a People?

But then Amalekites appear in 1 Samuel 27, 1 Samuel 30, and even 250 years later in 1 Chronicles 4:43. Clearly, the utter destruction of the Amalekite people did not literally happen. Similarly, in the tenth chapter of Joshua, we read how Joshua led the Israelites to attack the city of Makkedah and "left none remaining" (v. 28).<sup>28</sup> He then went to Libnah, where he also "left none remaining" (v. 30).<sup>29</sup> Same thing in Lachish, Eglon, Hebron, Debir, and so

<!-- page-411 -->

forth. Deuteronomy chapters 7 and 20 include similar language. The phrase for utterly wiping out someone, **haram** ("ban" or "consecration to destruction"), is used thirty-seven times of the Canaanites and ten times of the Amalekites.<sup>30</sup>

> **Haram:** a Hebrew word translated as "total destruction" often used hyperbolically to communicate a strong defeat.

Confusingly, in other passages, we read that the Canaanites and the Amalekites were to be *driven out*, not *wiped* out. As theologian and blogger Matthew Flannagan notes,

> The books of Deuteronomy and Exodus, in numerous places, state that the Canaanites are to be slowly driven out and expelled from the land, which is not the same thing as killing them. In fact, legislation is cited in the texts which clearly assumes that the Canaanites will survive Joshua's invasion. Immediately after stating that the Israelites should 'destroy them totally' the text reads, "make no treaty with them, and show them no mercy. Do not intermarry with them. Do not give your daughters to their sons or take their daughters for your sons." If they were all supposed to be dead then why bother issuing instructions regarding treaties and intermarriage?<sup>31</sup>

So how do we explain this? Well, for one thing, these accounts were written in a similar fashion to other epic stories of that time, according to certain historical and legal conventions that are unfamiliar in our own time.<sup>32</sup> Old Testament scholar Kenneth Kitchen writes,

> The type of rhetoric in question was a regular feature of military reports in the second and first millennia.... In the later fifteenth century BC Tuthmosis III could boast "the numerous army of Mitanni, was overthrown within the hour, annihilated totally, like those [now] non-existent" whereas, in fact, the forces of Mitanni lived to fight many another day, in the fifteenth and fourteenth centuries. Some centuries later, about 840/830 BC, Mesha king of Moab could boast that "Israel has utterly perished for always,"—a rather premature judgment at that date, by over a century! And so on, *ad libitum*. It is in this frame of reference that the Joshua rhetoric must also be understood.<sup>33</sup>

A simple reading of the text reveals that the Canaanites were not, in fact, wiped out. Flannagan notes,

> Over and over the text affirms that the land was still occupied by the Canaanites, who remain heavily armed and deeply entrenched in the cities. Astute readers will note that these are the same regions and the same cities that Joshua was said to have "destroyed all who breathed," left "no survivors" in just a few chapters earlier.<sup>34</sup>

So what is going on? Perhaps these accounts were, as was standard in battle accounts of the time, written with hyperbole (intentional exaggeration). Retired Notre Dame philosophy professor Alvin Plantinga compares it to a boxing fan yelling, "Knock his head off!" or a

<!-- page-412 -->

football fan rejoicing in the way his team "destroyed the defense."<sup>35</sup> As Paul Copan, a professor at Palm Beach Atlantic University and author of *Is God a Moral Monster?*, puts it, "Some might accuse Joshua of being misleading, or of getting it wrong. Not at all. He was speaking the language that everyone in his day would have understood. Rather than trying to deceive, Joshua was just saying he had fairly well trounced the enemy."<sup>36</sup>

This language of promised destruction was used in relation to not only Israel's enemies but Israel itself. In Jeremiah 25:9,<sup>37</sup> God promised to "utterly destroy" (*haram*) Judah and leave its cities "an everlasting desolation." But when we get to the end of Jeremiah, we see that although Judah's religious, political, economic, and military structures were incapacitated by the Babylonians, the people themselves were very much alive.

### Is Aggression Ever Justified?

Based on what we have just seen, it seems that Israel's enemies were wicked, dangerous, and aggressive. They refused ample opportunities to change their ways.<sup>38</sup> Knowing what we know, it's not easy to classify these passages as a strong nation whipping up on a weaker one just because it is more powerful. Instead, Copan says that "we should think more along the lines of the Sicilian police invading a Mafia stronghold to remove a corrupting network of crime so that citizens can live in peace rather than in fear."<sup>39</sup>

> **Chronological Snobbery:** a term used to identify the fallacious thinking that ideas of an older time are inherently inferior to present ideas simply by virtue of their temporal priority.

> **Homophobia:** the fear of homosexuals.

The foregoing analysis does not answer all our questions, but it does help us see many of the Old Testament accounts in a new light. There will always be people who retort, "Oh yeah? Well what about 'X' or 'Y'?" When faced with these challenges, we need to learn to ask—as Peter Williams, warden of Tyndale House, Cambridge, suggests—"Do you think that's the whole story?" Framing the issue from a twenty-first-century progressive mindset is what C. S. Lewis called **chronological snobbery**.<sup>40</sup> Good Bible scholars try to approach their tasks with sensitivity to the cultural nuances and historical realities of the time rather than assuming that their way of thinking is superior just because it is newer.

One fact, though, changes our deliberations entirely. If God is the all-knowing, all-loving, all-powerful creator of the universe, then his perspective on this world's events is by necessity higher than our perspective as mere humans. If God has complete foreknowledge, which Scripture claims he does, he would know what we couldn't: that a particular group needs to be subdued and that failing to drive them out would over the long term generate unthinkable harms.

Today, though, the charge that God is genocidal isn't as emotionally explosive as the charge that he is homophobic. **Homophobia**, strictly speaking, means the fear of homosexuals. Today, though, it is taken to mean an intense dislike of homosexuals or even the failure to approve of the homosexual lifestyle. God, according to Richard Dawkins, is insensitive and cruel to gay people and ought to be considered a homophobe. Let's take up this topic and see what we can make of it.

## 4. Does God Hate Homosexuals?

<!-- page-413 -->

The most quoted passage about sexuality in the Old Testament is probably Leviticus 18:6–23, which refers to "uncovering nakedness," a euphemism for sexual relations that literally means "dis-covering the sex of."<sup>41</sup> The passage prohibits people from having sexual relationships with their parents, with a parent's spouse, with their siblings or their siblings' spouses, with their children or grandchildren or with their spouses, with close relatives, with married neighbors, with someone of the same sex, or with animals. God promised that if people did these things, the land itself would "vomit" them out (Lev. 18:24–30).<sup>42</sup> Those who refused to pursue sexual purity or to repent of their sexual sin were to be "cut off," or made to leave the community. In some cases, Levitical law called for the death penalty. Although it seems extreme today, capital punishment for sexual offenses was not uncommon in history. In fact, in Muslim nations following sharia law, sexual offenses such as adultery and homosexuality are considered *hudud* crimes—crimes against God himself—and are punishable by stoning or mutilation.

While the Levitical law focuses on all kinds of sexual sin, some believers have narrowly emphasized those prohibiting homosexual behavior, giving the impression that the Bible cruelly and insensitively targets those who experience same-sex attraction. Bearing down on only one kind of sexual sin not only seems hypocritical but also distracts from the true biblical focus, which is on protecting people from sexual corruption and abuse and providing a way for people who have wrongly acted on their sexual impulses to be redeemed.

In this section, we will consider the question of homosexuality in the larger context of what key biblical passages say about marriage and sexuality in general. First, though, we must understand where modern views of sexuality come from and why they cause so many people to recoil when they read passages such as Leviticus 18–20. Much of what people believe about sexuality today can be traced to an Austrian psychoanalyst named Sigmund Freud, who hypothesized that our conscious behavior is shaped by our unconscious recollection of our past experiences. Through **psychoanalysis**, he believed he could uncover people's unconscious thoughts and motivations and then identify the stage of human development in which people were stuck so they could be freed.<sup>43</sup>

> **Psychoanalysis:** an approach to psychology developed by Sigmund Freud whereby a psychologist attempts to resolve a patient's psychological problems by uncovering and discussing the patient's unconscious, unfulfilled, and repressed desires.

Freud thought the suppression of sexual desire hurt people. This is so widely believed today that sexual immorality is now defined as the failure to permit people to pursue sexual pleasure any way they see fit. In the 1950s, a researcher named Alfred Kinsey issued two reports, *Sexual Behavior in the Human Male* (1948) and *Sexual Behavior in the Human Female* (1953), which challenged traditional views on sex and marriage. Kinsey's reports seemed scientific, and who can argue with science?

To those convinced of Freud's and Kinsey's arguments, it is difficult to imagine that God is the one who designed sex and that he made it to be normal and healthy. Rather, God is seen as the enemy of freedom and it's believed that restricting sexual freedom makes people unhealthy, abnormal, and mean.<sup>44</sup>

To Freud and Kinsey, sex is something we do with our bodies; to God, sex is something we do with our souls as well as our bodies. Our sexual behavior reflects our internal understanding of

<!-- page-414 -->

who we are as people and how we ought to treat others. Professor G. A. Cooke frames it this way: "The ancient mind fastened on the outward acts revealing the inward state. While the modern mind goes directly to the internal condition."<sup>45</sup> The biblical passage assumes that people have the ability to avoid acting on destructive feelings and to fail to do so leads to corruption and abuse.

Having a whole section in the law on sexual activity underscores a simple point: God views sexual immorality as a tipping point toward idolatry. As Michael Goheen and Craig Bartholomew express it,

> The close connection between idolatry and adultery in Scripture helps us to see the religious and relational nature of sin. A husband has the right to the exclusive loyalty of his wife, and the wife to that of her husband. Marriage is an exclusive relationship that admits no third party. Sin is portrayed in Scripture as religious adultery: a third party (some idol) has insinuated itself into that exclusive relationship and adulterated it. Sin is religious and relational: it is against God.<sup>46</sup>

To God, sexual sin is not just those innocent, private acts between two people for which God enjoys punishing people. Jeremiah 7:19 says, "'Is it I whom they provoke?' declares the Lord. 'Is it not themselves, to their own shame?'" Sexual sin is an act of rebellion against God's design for his image bearers. It is saying, in essence, "I am so intent on satisfying my sexual passions that I am willing to break down my community, destroy relationships, shatter trust, forego God's plan for my life, and choke off the blessing God intends for those around me." Sexual sin takes many of the *very good* aspects of creation and turns them into a source of hurt and diminishment. Such impudence always hurts those most vulnerable: women and children.

This understanding explains why sexual impurity mattered so greatly to the first group of people to receive the Levitical commands about sexual ethics, the ancient nation of Israel. It threatened to unravel the most delicate threads holding the community together. No one *had* to remain a member of this community, but if one chose as much, he was to act the part of those *set apart*.

> The sacrificial system made it clear that God's goal was not to create a nation of vigilantes who roamed around finding people to stone but rather to create a people who pursued purity in every area of life.

Still, should sexual purity mean so much that people who violate it should be *killed*? The penalty listed in Leviticus 18 was that the offenders were to be "cut off," or made to leave the community. Under what circumstances were they to be killed instead? We don't know. Perhaps it was just a strongly worded warning, akin to what we saw earlier with the wording of battle victory reports. Or perhaps there were circumstances in which sexual offenders who refused to repent and refused to leave would actually lose their lives, not just their place in the community.

Christians who have used the Levitical passages to unfairly target homosexuality and those who are offended by this are both missing the point, which is that God does not express his mercy by overlooking sin but by providing a way of repentance. Leviticus makes provisions for sacrifices that will atone for sin of various kinds (Lev. 6:1–7), and the most common phrase in the instructions relating to the Levitical sacrifice was forgiveness (Lev. 1:4; 4:20, 26, 31, 35; 5:10, 16; 16:20–22). Even in the Old Testament, we see that God arranged for a substitute,

<!-- page-415 -->

in the form of an animal to be sacrificed. This was a very costly thing that underscored how seriously God took Israel's purity. As Walter Kaiser puts it, "Forgiveness was not cheap, just as human forgiveness necessitated that someone pay if the reality of forgiveness could not be ever to be more than a cliché."<sup>47</sup> The sacrificial system made it clear that God's goal was not to create a nation of vigilantes who roamed around finding people to stone but rather to create a people who pursued purity in every area of life.

To summarize, the children of Israel were a set-apart community. If they failed to act as those set apart, provision was made for them to repent and be forgiven. If they refused to repent, they forfeited their right to live in the community and possibly risked being put to death. The big question, then, is not specifically how homosexuality was treated in the Old Testament, for all sexual impurity was treated equally. God expected self-discipline, and we have every indication that the nation was healthy and prosperous when it was and dysfunctional and abusive when it was not.

The question for us today is different than it was for Israel. We do not live in a nation that was chosen by God in the same way Israel was. Just as there were **sojourners** who joined Israel's community, Christians today are sojourners in society. As sojourners, Christians are to bring biblical standards of purity to bear by their behavior. First Peter 2:11–12 says, "Beloved, I urge you as sojourners and exiles to abstain from the passions of the flesh, which wage war against your soul. Keep your conduct among the Gentiles honorable, so that when they speak against you as evildoers, they may see your good deeds and glorify God on the day of visitation."

> **Sojourner:** someone who lives in a particular place for an extended period of time but whose home is somewhere else.

Living pure, set-apart lives in a society given over to evil is not an easy thing to do. It is much easier to give in to society's values than to live in a way that challenges them. It can be done, though, as the early Christians living in Rome demonstrated. When Christianity first arose, Rome was a shockingly perverse society, even by today's standards. Everything was fair game sexually, including preying sexually on children.<sup>48</sup> It is fashionable to think that sexually permissive cultures offer more freedom. The truth is, women and children end up as victims. Women live in fear of being raped. Wives are afraid of being discarded. Mothers worry that their kids will be molested. Beneath the airbrushed image is an ugly reality that treats women and children as objects and as dispensable.

The Bible's call to faithfulness is not anti-sex. Quite the opposite. Biblical sexual mores break the shackles of false freedom and bring those imprisoned by it into the light of Christ, where there is true freedom (John 8:36).

Sometimes evidence of the biblical truth about sexuality arises in unexpected places, such as in a class at Harvard University. For many years, Dr. Armand Nicholi has taught a popular class at Harvard comparing the worldviews of Sigmund Freud, whose views of sexuality helped spark the sexual revolution, and C. S. Lewis, the famous author and scholar who was one of Freud's critics.<sup>49</sup> Lewis does not so much refute Freud's ideas but rather shows how anemic they are in comparison to a biblical view of sexuality. According to Nicholi, "Lewis goes beyond Freud to argue that people who control their sexual impulses understand their sexuality *more* than people who fail at controlling. 'Virtue—even attempted virtue—brings light; indulgence brings fog.'"<sup>50</sup>

<!-- page-416 -->

Interestingly, Nicholi, who plays the role of an impartial observer in the discussions with his students, says in his capacity as a psychiatrist,

> From my clinical practice of many years and my research on young adults who come from divorced families, I can say unequivocally that a great deal of the unhappiness in our society results from failure to understand the distinction between being in love (Eros) and loving in the deeper sense (Agape).<sup>51</sup>

Referencing Lewis, he concludes that "the intense feeling of being in love ought to change to a deeper, more comfortable and mature kind of love based on the will as well as on feeling."<sup>52</sup> Put simply, to be sexually mature is to restrain ourselves from acting on our sexual impulses outside of man/woman marriage, whether those impulses are heterosexual or homosexual. The best love is based on our wills, not just our feelings. This is how God made us. Nicholi's studies of Harvard students who had experienced a Christian conversion shows how profound this sort of love can be. Before their conversions, students described their sexual relationships as "less than satisfactory and as contributing little to providing the emotional closeness they desired."<sup>53</sup> Afterward, though, even though the biblical standard of chastity inside of marriage seems strict by modern standards, "they found these clear-cut boundaries less confusing than no boundaries at all and helpful in relating to members of the opposite sex 'as persons rather than sexual objects.'"<sup>54</sup>

> Inside the marriage bond, though, what would otherwise be using another person as an object becomes two people breathing life into each other.

This is an awesome realization, and it helps us better understand God's viewpoint. To violate God's sexual standards diminishes us as image bearers of God. It sounds harsh, but it's as if we say to our sexual partners, "By following my own rules rather than God's, I am making my desires my idol, and you must participate in the sacrifice by allowing me to use you as an object by which I can achieve satisfaction." The other person's willingness to be used doesn't make it any less selfish. In fact, it makes both individuals selfish: two people complicit in using one another.

Inside the marriage bond, though, what would otherwise be using another person as an object becomes two people breathing life into each other. In Rome, it was this aspect of Christian morality that seemed to have the most influence. Of Christians, it was said that "they share their table with strangers, but not their spouses with strangers."<sup>55</sup> The morality of Christian families gave them such an advantage in society that Galen, a Greek physician, said that Christians had such an "intense desire to attain moral excellence that they are in no way inferior to true philosophers."<sup>56</sup> Ultimately, the whole society began to see the wisdom of Christian sexual morality and passed laws protecting marriage and prohibiting the sexual exploitation of children.

As we have seen throughout Scripture, God and his people are in a covenant relationship, and the marriage relationship between a man and a woman mirrors how we relate to God in this way. So does this mean God hates homosexuals? No. Those who struggle with homosexual attraction are just as much covenant members of the bride of Christ—the church—as anyone else. Their will to remain faithful to God by refraining from homosexual

<!-- page-417 -->

behavior, as with those who experience heterosexual attraction also refrain from sexual behavior outside of man/woman marriage, breathes life into the church as it breathes into them through Christ.

To summarize, when we see what the Old Testament really claims about sexuality, it becomes clear that these passages are not targeting homosexuals for discrimination. This explanation may not satisfy those who lodge the criticism in the first place, but Christianity is not a viewpoint that becomes more popular the less it claims to be true. As Chuck Colson, who went from working for a US president to prison to launching the world's largest Christian ministry to prisoners, phrases it,

> Orthodoxy often requires us to be hard precisely where the world is soft, and soft where the world is hard. It means condemning the homosexual lifestyle and being labeled bigots. It means caring for AIDS patients though many think us fools. It means respecting the life of law though our culture is increasingly lawless. It means visiting the prisoners who offend that law though our culture would prefer to forget them. In every way that matters, Christianity is an affront to the world; it is countercultural.<sup>57</sup>

D. A. Carson agrees, pointing out that "the plurality of errors and heresies that our generation confronts demands that lines be drawn—thoughtfully, carefully, humbly, corrigibly, but drawn nonetheless."<sup>58</sup>

## 5. Does the Bible Endorse Slavery?

> **Ebed:** a Hebrew word translated as "servant" or "slave"; communicates a relationship of dependency, not ownership.

Slavery is in the Bible. Abraham had slaves and even had a child by one of them, Hagar, when his wife insisted on it.<sup>59</sup> We need to be careful, though, not to associate the word *slavery* in the Old Testament with the abusive slavery of the antebellum South in America. The term translated "slave" or "servant" (**ebed**) is really emphasizing a dynamic relationship of dependency, not ownership.<sup>60</sup>

Slavery has been common everywhere and at all times throughout history. What is different is the Bible's emphasis on the creational norm that *everyone* bears the image of God (Gen. 1:26–27).<sup>61</sup> We see this where Job recognized that his bondservants were just as much image bearers of God as he was and that he would have to answer to God if he mistreated them (Job 31:13–14).<sup>62</sup> The Old Testament law makes provisions for the care and protection of slaves in Leviticus 19, 22, 25, and Deuteronomy 5, 15, 16, and 21.

In the New Testament, slaves are mentioned as well, but not in the way we might expect if Christianity by its nature endorsed slavery. For example, in Romans 16:9, Paul greets slaves by referring to them using terms of equality such as *kinsmen*, *fellow prisoners*, and *fellow workers*. Believers were to worship together and even "greet one another with a holy kiss" (v. 16, in the context of giving greetings to certain believers by name, including those known to be slaves).<sup>63</sup> Equality with slaves was a deeply radical belief for that time. More common was the view of Aristotle, who believed that some humans were slaves by nature.<sup>64</sup>

<!-- page-418 -->

The radical equality of slaves in the New Testament is everywhere in the text, and clear: all are one in Christ Jesus no matter their role in life (Gal. 3:28; 1 Cor. 12:13; Col. 3:11).<sup>65</sup> Paul commanded that the slave Onesimus be treated as a brother by Philemon (Philem. v. 16).<sup>66</sup> Revelation 18:11–13<sup>67</sup> condemns trading humans as "cargo," echoing Ezekiel 27:13.<sup>68</sup> First Timothy 1:9–10<sup>69</sup> condemns "kidnappers," people who forced humans into slavery.

But if God created everyone with equal dignity and in his image, why would the Bible not expressly and universally condemn slavery? Let's look at this question from five perspectives:

**First, Christianity did not invent slavery.** Virtually every society at that time had slaves. It was universal. It would not have been the case that someone would pick up the Torah and think, *Hey, this thing called slavery is pretty cool. I think I'll get a slave for myself.*

**Second, we should put the biblical discussion in its cultural context.** The ancient Near Eastern cultural context is different from our modern postcolonial context. The two biggest causes of slavery in the ancient world were war and poverty, not skin color. According to Old Testament scholar Christopher J. H. Wright, the slavery found in ancient Israel was

> qualitatively vastly different from slavery in the large imperial civilizations—the contemporary ancient Near Eastern empires, and especially the latter empires of the Greeks and Romans. There the slave markets were glutted with captives of war and displaced peoples, and slaves were put to degrading and dehumanizing labour. And, of course, Israelite slavery was even more different from the ghastly commercialized and massive-scale slave trade that Arabs, Europeans and Americans perpetrated upon Africa.<sup>70</sup>

How was slavery in Israel qualitatively different? First, people could actually enter into slavery in order to achieve their financial objectives. Because there was no bank to which they could go to get a loan to buy a piece of property, they would go to work as a "slave" to the property's owner for an agreed-upon period of time. This kind of slavery was not "chattel" slavery (forced servitude and treatment of a person as an object rather than as a person). In fact, banning this kind of slavery would have made it impossible for poor people to advance economically. Second, the laws of Israel were very specific in how to treat slaves with dignity, which must have been a great relief to those who had been slaves elsewhere.

Please understand: this is not a justification of chattel slavery, nor is it some kind of absolution for Christians who participated in this type of slavery in the West or those who justified dehumanizing slaves by twisting Scripture. It is simply to point out the fact that slavery in ancient Israel was different, even though we use the same word to describe it.<sup>71</sup>

**Third, just because slavery is mentioned and provisions are made for it does not mean that Scripture endorses slavery.** Rather, it acknowledges slavery's existence and makes specific provisions to protect slaves from the abuse and the stripping away of their rights that was common in the ancient Near East. As we saw earlier, the humane laws outlined in the Torah were a vast improvement over the laws of other ancient Near East nations.

<!-- page-419 -->

**Fourth, we need to remember that Israel was not God's ideal society.** Israel came out of slavery and was already corrupt and broken just like the rest of the peoples of the world. God's redemptive work with them was a progressive work. Even though slavery in ancient Israel differed markedly from slavery in other cultures, it was still far from representing God's ideal of people who would steward the earth as his image bearers.

> Even though slavery in ancient Israel differed markedly from slavery in other cultures, it was still far from representing God's ideal of people who would steward the earth as his image bearers.

An uncomfortable question, but one that must be addressed, is how fast should we expect such a society to progress? Surely some people say "We need to change slowly," because they benefit from things being the way they are and don't really want them to change at all. But this does not mean that the "Change everything *now*" approach is therefore correct. As author John Mark Reynolds observes, "Economic slavery is evil, but immediate abolition could have been a worse evil, possibly leading to violence, starvation, and total societal collapse."<sup>72</sup> Immediate abolition would have created lots of problems; a moral tipping point had to be reached over time. Instant, destabilizing change almost always ends in misery, whereas gradual change based on right principles stands a good chance of producing long-term good.

**Fifth, when it comes to the New Testament, Jesus was not silent on slavery.** Jesus was about setting spiritual captives free, and this freedom had real-world effects. When Jesus began his public ministry, he stood in the synagogue to read the following passage: "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to proclaim good news to the poor. He has sent me to proclaim liberty to the captives and recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty those who are oppressed" (Luke 4:18). Because Jesus was quoting Isaiah 61:1–2<sup>73</sup>—which seems to deal with literal captives, not just spiritual captives—we can see the relationship between humanity's spiritual and physical condition in a new way. Being no longer helplessly bound to sin, our lives begin to change. Society begins to change. The conditions in which people find themselves, whether through their own sin or the sin of others, begins to change.

> Before Christianity influenced cultures, every civilization thought slavery was normal and acceptable. Christians inspired by Jesus's proclamation of freedom for the captives changed that.

In later times, the foundation laid down in the Old Testament and continued through the ministry of Christ galvanized Christian opposition to chattel slavery. In some cultures, such as in America, it took a shamefully long time. Still, before Christianity influenced cultures, every civilization thought slavery was normal and acceptable. Christians inspired by Jesus's proclamation of freedom for the captives changed that.<sup>74</sup>

We must also keep in mind that slavery is still an issue today. This is particularly the case with sex trafficking, which results from a refusal to live by the ethic of sexual integrity established in the Bible. In the end, the most stable opposition comes from acknowledging and practicing that all humans are made in the image of God and have inherent dignity. The Judeo-Christian worldview—and not others, including

<!-- page-420 -->

Secularism—laid this foundation. As Sean McDowell and Jonathan Morrow put it, "If you remove God from the equation, you also remove inherent human dignity and equality."<sup>75</sup>

## 6. Isn't the Bible Oppressive to Women?

> **Misogyny:** the hatred or dislike of women.

We take women's rights so much for granted today it is easy to forget how the Judeo-Christian worldview made them possible. Ideas have consequences for people, and the biblical idea of human dignity has led to an about-face in which women are treated as equally valuable to men in areas influenced by Christianity. This is not the case in most other places in history, even today.

The dislike of women or girls is called **misogyny**. Many people in history, including Christians, have acted in misogynistic ways by abusing or diminishing women. Does this mean, as Richard Dawkins seems to think, that the Bible, especially the Old Testament, is domineering or unfair toward women. At the time it was written, however, the commands in the Old Testament provided women unprecedented protection from and even legal recourse against men's anger, pride, lust, and jealousy.

Even today, equal treatment for women is a pipe dream in most of the world. So when Dawkins characterizes God as a misogynist, he is comparing the Bible to his notion of an ideal state, which does not exist and for which, as an atheist, he has no rational basis. In a fallen world, we should not ask why the Christian worldview is not being lived perfectly but whether, in spite of the flaws of its adherents, the Christian worldview best describes the contours of the world as it actually is. When viewed from this perspective, we can see that the Christian worldview gives unparalleled dignity to women. In short, Jesus is good news for women.

Being a woman in the ancient world would have been extremely challenging. Canaanite and Amalekite civilizations were shockingly abusive to women. Greek and Roman cultures were also difficult for women. According to scholar Rodney Stark,

> Women were in relative short supply owing to female infanticide, practiced by all classes, and to the additional deaths caused by abortion. The status of women was very low. Girls received little or no education ... were married at puberty and often before. Under Athenian law a woman was classified as a child, regardless of age, and therefore was the legal property of some man at all stages of her life. Males could divorce by simply ordering a wife out of the household.<sup>76</sup>

In Rome, as author Alvin Schmidt points out, *patria potestas* and *pater familias* gave the husband and father "supreme, absolute power over his children and grandchildren, even when they were grown. He alone had the power to divorce his wife, and he also possessed the power to execute his children. He could even execute his married daughter if she committed adultery in his or her husband's house."<sup>77</sup>

The Old Testament treats women very differently from other cultures of that time, starting with the affirmation in Genesis that men and women both bear God's image, and Levitical law, which provided unprecedented protection of women. For example, Israelites were not

<!-- page-421 -->

to treat female prisoners of war as sex objects. They were to be either married or released (Deut. 21:10–14).<sup>78</sup> Leviticus chapter 12 says that women who have recently given birth or who are in their monthly cycle are to be considered unclean, which gave them a break from daily chores, ensured proper hygiene, and protected them from sexual advances during the period of menstruation.

In Jesus's ministry, women gained a stature unheard of even in the context of Israel. Jesus healed several women of diseases, interacted with women of different races, and extended forgiveness to women who had committed sexual sin. All of these acts were radically progressive (and, many have argued, even feminist) for his time and context. Women followers supported Jesus's ministry, were the last to leave the cross, and were the first to arrive at the empty tomb. Jesus treated women with the dignity of their inherent value as image bearers.

The apostle Paul, although he's often attacked for his perceived low view of women, considered at least twelve women coworkers in his ministry (Acts 16:14–15, 40; 1 Cor. 1:11; Phil. 4:2–3; Col. 4:15).<sup>79</sup> This would have been unprecedented because women were either ignored or shunned in religious conversation at that time. Moreover, Paul calls husbands to love their wives "just as Christ loved the church and gave himself up for her" (Eph. 5:25). He even instituted new respect for children, teaching fathers to "not provoke your children to anger, but bring them up in the discipline and instruction of the Lord" (Eph. 6:4).

Paul emphasized that the gospel is good news to all, and available to all, regardless of gender or status:

> In Christ Jesus you are all sons of God, through faith. For as many of you as were baptized into Christ have put on Christ. There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither slave nor free, there is no male and female, for you are all one in Christ Jesus. And if you are Christ's, then you are Abraham's offspring, heirs according to promise. (Gal. 3:26–29)

Similarly, the apostle Peter reminds Christian husbands to treat their wives with "honor" because "they are heirs with you of the grace of life" (1 Pet. 3:7).

> Human sinfulness of all kinds has caused all manner of moral evil, with women and children often being targeted. Christianity, when properly understood and practiced, does not lead to the oppression of women. Any such oppression has occurred in spite of Christian convictions, not because of them.

In light of all of this, is it any wonder that "the ancient sources and modern historians agree that primary conversion to Christianity was far more prevalent among females than males"?<sup>80</sup> Christianity that was properly understood and applied was very good news for women.

Obviously, other worldviews call Christianity's goodness for women into question. New Spiritualist Eckhart Tolle says that the story of history is the story of the male form dominating the female form, which led to the Inquisition and witch burning (a not-so-subtle accusation against Christianity). "Males who denied the feminine even within themselves were now running the world, a world that was totally out of balance," he says. "The rest is history or rather a case history of insanity."<sup>81</sup>

<!-- page-422 -->

Some feminist historians, in trying to bolster claims that Christianity was a force for evil, claim that millions were killed in witch hunts perpetrated by the church.<sup>82</sup> Feminist Mary Daly accepts reports of nine million people being killed as witches, most of whom were women.<sup>83</sup> Scholars examining the issue have arrived at a still appalling but drastically lower number of around 150 to 300 hundred people per year in Europe and North America (three-quarters of whom were women) over the course of three hundred years.<sup>84</sup> Such witch trials ended in the aftermath of nineteen accused witches being executed in Salem, Massachusetts. Governor Sir William Phips, horrified at how things had gotten out of hand, joined respected ministers such as Deodat Lawson, Increase Mather, and Samuel Willard in bringing the Salem trials to an end.<sup>85</sup> Today we see such trials and executions as an example of the bizarre excess that can occur when people become exercised about demonic activity. Tragic as these deaths were, it is a case of rhetorical excess to call them a holocaust, a term implying slaughter on a massacre and that is properly applied to the eleven million killed by the Nazis, the tens of millions starved to death in the USSR under Stalin, the seventy-two million killed under Mao in China, or even the forty thousand or so who had their heads lopped off during a two-year period of the French Revolution.

Human sinfulness of all kinds has caused all manner of moral evil, with women and children often being targeted. At the same time, if we are to be intellectually honest, Christianity, when properly understood and practiced, does not lead to the oppression of women.<sup>86</sup> Any such oppression has occurred in spite of Christian convictions, not because of them.

## 7. What Kind of God Is This, Really?

Our examination of Richard Dawkins's accusations—that Christianity upholds genocide, homophobia, slavery, and misogyny—shows that his claims are exaggerated, culturally insensitive, and factually wrong. Moreover, his assumption that his atheistic worldview has produced or is capable of producing better results is a conclusion for which there is no evidence.

> **Megalomania:** a psychopathic condition characterized by delusions of grandeur.

Still, as we draw this chapter to a close, we should tackle one more problem. Dawkins claimed that God is megalomaniacal. The term **megalomania** refers to a delusional condition in which someone considers himself to be worthy of worship. I have heard people say (and you probably have too), "*I just can't love or worship a God who is so self-centered.*" But again, in our sin nature, we assume that *we* are viewing the world properly and that God is not. It is hardly different from the approach to the world we saw our first parents take in the garden of Eden. Author and speaker Alex McFarland addresses this issue:

> Worship does relate to God's own self-knowledge and His comprehensive understanding of us. God must treat Himself as the greatest good because He is the greatest good. He is the perfect being based on His nature, apart from any function related to us. If God treats anything else as the greatest good, then He is not affirming the truth about Himself. It is wrong for us to treat ourselves as the greatest good because we are not. It is not wrong for God to treat Himself as the greatest good because He

<!-- page-423 -->

> is. He is not the one who benefits from our worship; rather worship allows us to see Him as He is and so continues the extension of His love and goodness in creation.<sup>87</sup>

In order to assume that God is megalomaniacal, we would have to assume that he is not who he claims to be and that we are somehow in a special position to know this. In other words, we can reduce God only by being megalomaniacal ourselves. As pastor Tim Keller puts it, "Without the gospel, our hearts have to manufacture self-esteem by comparing our group with other groups. But the gospel tells us we are all unclean without Christ, and all clean in Him."<sup>88</sup>

The desire to diminish God and elevate ourselves is not just a problem for Richard Dawkins; it's also a problem for you and me. This problem is called **idolatry**. When we judge God, we usually judge him from the standpoint of power: "If I were in charge, I would do it differently." But we don't have that kind of power, nor do we know the things God knows. Our delusions of power, then, are actually idols. As attorney and author Ken Sande notes, once we embrace an idol, even if it is an utterly false god, it still changes us. First we *desire* things to be the way we want them, then we *demand* that they are that way, then we *judge* those we think are keeping things from being the way we want them, and then ultimately we seek to *punish* those who do not conform to our expectations.

> **Idolatry:** the act of worshipping or valuing something above God; entertaining thoughts about God that are unworthy of him.

Idols always demand sacrifices, and what we end up sacrificing are our own best interests. I remember being a child in a grumpy mood during an ice cream stop. Instead of ice cream, I wanted a hamburger. My parents said no. To "punish" them, I refused to order any ice cream. It didn't occur to me until years later that my refusal to eat ice cream was not a punishment to my parents. It saved them a couple of bucks, and they happily enjoyed their ice cream while I sat in the backseat and pouted. Similarly, our attempts to "punish" God always end up hurting us more.

Let's return to a theme repeated throughout this volume. The Christian insists that the good news of Jesus Christ is that he became the sacrifice for sin so grievous it called for our own deaths. Brian Jones says,

> The older translations of the Bible such as the King James, American Standard, and New American Standard versions all use the word *propitiation* as a translation of *hilasterion* [a propitiatory gift for the gods], while the newer English translations have opted to translate it with phrases like 'sacrifice of atonement' or 'sacrifice for sin.' The meaning is the same, regardless. *Hilasterion* was used to describe offerings made in pagan temples. Surprisingly, Paul chose this exact word to capture the essence of the work of Christ on the cross.<sup>89</sup>

In many pagan religions, the gods are manipulated and soothed and even fed by sacrifices. Two things, however, make the Christian idea very different. First, God provided the gift himself through Christ. He *became* the gift.<sup>90</sup> As Tim Keller states,

> If your fundamental is a man dying on the cross for his enemies, if the very heart of your self-image and your religion is a man praying for his enemies as he died

<!-- page-424 -->

> for them, sacrificing for them, loving them—if that sinks into your heart of hearts, it's going to produce the kind of life that the early Christians produced. The most inclusive possible claim—and that is that this is the truth. But what is the truth? The truth is a God become weak, loving, and dying for the people who opposed him, dying forgiving them.<sup>91</sup>

Second, God did this to demonstrate his justice. In other words, God is not like the gods of history, restless through unsatisfied lusts. God's anger is justified *because true injustice has occurred*. To us, anger is usually a sign of losing control, as in road rage. To God, anger is a determination to do what is right, whatever the cost, and according to the Bible the cost was self-sacrifice. Romans 3:21–26 says,

> The righteousness of God has been manifested apart from the law, although the Law and the Prophets bear witness to it—the righteousness of God through faith in Jesus Christ for all who believe. For there is no distinction: for all have sinned and fall short of the glory of God, and are justified by his grace as a gift, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus, whom God put forward as a propitiation by his blood, to be received by faith. This was to show God's righteousness, because in his divine forbearance he had passed over former sins. It was to show his righteousness at the present time, so that he might be just and the justifier of the one who has faith in Jesus.

## 8. Conclusion

> It's practically impossible for our human imagination to conceive of a love so deep that the lover would sacrifice everything for his beloved. In fact, we could not conceive of it without specific revelation from God. This kind of love is like a judge who, in pronouncing the death penalty for a guilty killer, steps down and accepts the sentence himself.

It's practically impossible for our human imagination to conceive of a love so deep that the lover would sacrifice everything for his beloved. In fact, we could not conceive of it without specific revelation from God. This kind of love is like a judge who, in pronouncing the death penalty for a guilty killer, steps down and accepts the sentence himself. We can't conceive of this. But the biblical record describes that it did happen almost just that way, and in paying our penalty himself, God demonstrated a kind of love we can only hope that people like Richard Dawkins someday come to discover.

## Endnotes

1. Richard Dawkins, *The God Delusion* (New York: Houghton Mifflin, 2006), 51.
2. For a thorough analysis of the goodness of God from a theological and philosophical perspective, see David Baggett and Jerry L. Walls, *Good God: The Theistic Foundations of Morality* (New York: Oxford University Press, 2011).
3. Michael W. Goheen and Craig G. Bartholomew, *Living at the Crossroads: An Introduction to Christian Worldview* (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2008), 47.
4. H. Wayne House and Dennis W. Jowers, *Reasons for Our Hope: An Introduction to Christian Apologetics* (Nashville: B&H Academic, 2011), 123.
5. House and Jowers, *Reasons for Our Hope*, particularly chap. 9: "Apologetics in the Old Testament." Psalm 46:8–9: "Come, behold the works of the Lord, how he has brought desolations on the earth. He makes wars cease to the end of the earth; he breaks the bow and shatters the spear; he burns the chariots with fire"; 1 Kings 8:60: "All the peoples of the earth may know that the Lord is God; there is no other."
6. See John H. Walton, "Interpreting the Bible as an Ancient Near Eastern Document," in *Israel: Ancient Kingdom or Late Invention?*, ed. Daniel I. Block (Nashville: B&H Academic, 2008), 313–18.
7. House and Jowers, *Reasons for Our Hope*, particularly chap. 9: "Apologetics in the Old Testament."
8. House and Jowers, *Reasons for Our Hope*, particularly chap. 9: "Apologetics in the Old Testament."
9. House and Jowers, *Reasons for Our Hope*, particularly chap. 9: "Apologetics in the Old Testament."
10. House and Jowers, *Reasons for Our Hope*, particularly chap. 9: "Apologetics in the Old Testament."
11. In an ancient Near Eastern setting, the third commandment, the prohibition against misusing God's name, would have been understood as a prohibition against manipulating or harnessing his power for one's own selfish purposes. The "name" of a given pagan deity was frequently invoked as a technique—a magical incantation—to master supernatural forces to pursue earthly or material success. This third commandment prohibits using the name Yahweh ("the Lord") for this type of purpose. See Walton, "Interpreting the Bible as an Ancient Near Eastern Document," 313–18.
12. House and Jowers, *Reasons for Our Hope*, 129 (emphasis mine).
13. Walter Kaiser, *Toward an Old Testament Theology* (Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 1978), 100.
14. Kaiser, *Toward an Old Testament Theology*, 106–7.
15. Exodus 4:22–23: "Then you shall say to Pharaoh, 'Thus says the Lord, Israel is my firstborn son, and I say to you, "Let my son go that he may serve me." If you refuse to let him go, behold, I will kill your firstborn son'"; Deuteronomy 14:1: "You are the sons of the Lord your God. You shall not cut yourselves or make any baldness on your foreheads for the dead."
16. Exodus 6:7: "I will take you to be my people, and I will be your God, and you shall know that I am the Lord your God, who has brought you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians"; Exodus 19:6: "And you shall be to me a kingdom of priests and a holy nation. These are the words that you shall speak to the people of Israel."
17. Exodus 12:3: "Tell all the congregation of Israel that on the tenth day of this month every man shall take a lamb according to their fathers' houses, a lamb for a household."
18. Exodus 19:5: "If you will indeed obey my voice and keep my covenant, you shall be my treasured possession among all peoples, for all the earth is mine."
19. Deuteronomy 7:6: "You are a people holy to the Lord your God. The Lord your God has chosen you to be a people for his treasured possession, out of all the peoples who are on the face of the earth"; Deuteronomy 14:2: "You are a people holy to the Lord your God, and the Lord has chosen you to be a people for his treasured possession, out of all the peoples who are on the face of the earth"; Deuteronomy 26:18: "The Lord has declared today that you are a people for his treasured possession, as he has promised you, and that you are to keep all his commandments"; Deuteronomy 26:19: "He will set you in praise and in fame and in honor high above all nations that he has made, and that you shall be a people holy to the Lord your God, as he promised."
20. Exodus 19:3–6: "Moses went up to God. The Lord called to him out of the mountain, saying, 'Thus you shall say to the house of Jacob, and tell the people of Israel: You yourselves have seen what I did to the Egyptians, and how I bore you on eagles' wings and brought you to myself. Now therefore, if you will indeed obey my voice and keep my covenant, you shall be my treasured possession among all peoples, for all the earth is mine; and you shall be to me a kingdom of priests and a holy nation. These are the words that you shall speak to the people of Israel.'"
21. Kaiser, *Toward an Old Testament Theology*, 109.
22. Kaiser, *Toward an Old Testament Theology*, 109.
23. As a set-apart nation, Israel "could not be consecrated any further to any thing or person (Leviticus 27:26) or enter into any rival relationships (Leviticus 18:2–5)." Kaiser, *Toward an Old Testament Theology*, 111.
24. Paul Copan, *Is God a Moral Monster? Making Sense of the Old Testament God* (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Academic, 2011), 159.
25. *International Standard Bible Encyclopedia*, s.v. "Molech; Moloch," www.biblestudytools.com/encyclopedias/isbe/molech-moloch.html.
26. It could be that Haman was, as was the custom of the day, using hyperbole to describe the extent of his intentions. The book of Esther, though, displays details of a conspiracy at the highest levels of society that aimed to carry out genocide.
27. 1 Samuel 15:8: "He took Agag the king of the Amalekites alive and devoted to destruction all the people with the edge of the sword"; 1 Samuel 15:20: "Saul said to Samuel, 'I have obeyed the voice of the Lord. I have gone on the mission on which the Lord sent me. I have brought Agag the king of Amalek, and I have devoted the Amalekites to destruction.'"
28. Joshua 10:28: "As for Makkedah, Joshua captured it on that day and struck it, and its king, with the edge of the sword. He devoted to destruction every person in it; he left none remaining. And he did to the king of Makkedah just as he had done to the king of Jericho."
29. Joshua 10:30: "The Lord gave it also and its king into the hand of Israel. And he struck it with the edge of the sword, and every person in it; he left none remaining in it. And he did to its king as he had done to the king of Jericho."
30. Copan, *Is God a Moral Monster?*, 174.
31. Matt Flannagan, "Contra Mudum: Did God Command Genocide in the Old Testament?," August 1, 2010, www.mandm.org.nz/2010/08/contra-mudum-did-god-command-genocide-in-the-old-testament.html.
32. Flannagan, "Contra Mudum."
33. Quoted in Flannagan, "Contra Mudum."
34. Flannagan, "Contra Mudum."
35. Flannagan writes, "In a comprehensive comparative study of ancient Near Eastern conquest accounts, Old Testament scholar, K. Lawson Younger compares the Joshua narratives to similar writings between Joshua and reports of wars written by or for kings of these surrounding cultures. He concludes that the Old Testament uses the same literary conventions. He notes, some of these surrounding narratives in chapters 9–12 are compared to the conventions of writing about conquests in Egyptian, Hittite, Akkadian, Moabite, and Aramaic texts, they are revealed to be very similar. He substantiates with numerous examples in his book." See "Contra Mudum."
36. Copan, *Is God a Moral Monster?*, 171.
37. Jeremiah 25:9: "Behold, I will send for all the tribes of the north, declares the Lord, and for Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon, my servant, and I will bring them against this land and its inhabitants, and against all these surrounding nations. I will devote them to destruction, and make them a horror, a hissing, and an everlasting desolation."
38. Keep in mind that God had provided ample evidence that he was the one true God. The plagues on Egypt, the parting of the Red Sea, the provision of manna to keep the Israelites alive, and the presence of a cloud by day and fire by night over Israel's camp. Some in the surrounding nations saw these signs and aligned themselves with Israel (for example, Rahab and the Shechemites at Mount Ebal (Josh. 2:8–13; 8:33, 35). Those who chose instead to attack Israel were justly repelled.
39. Copan, *Is God a Moral Monster?*, 167.
40. C. S. Lewis, *Surprised by Joy: The Shape of My Early Life* (New York: Harcourt, 1955), 206–16.
41. For more on the Hebrew *erva galah*, see John S. Borgsma and Scott W. Hahn, "Noah's Nakedness and Curse on Canaan (Genesis 9:20–27)," *Journal of Biblical Literature* 124, no. 1 (2005): 25–40.
42. Leviticus 18:24–30: "Do not make yourselves unclean by any of these things, for by all these the nations I am driving out before you have become unclean, and the land became unclean, so that I punished its iniquity, and the land vomited out its inhabitants. But you shall keep my statutes and my rules and do none of these abominations, either the native or the stranger who sojourns among you (for the people of the land, who were before you, did all of these abominations, so that the land became unclean), lest the land vomit you out when you make it unclean, as it vomited out the nation that was before you. For everyone who does any of these abominations, the persons who do them shall be cut off from among their people. So keep my charge never to practice any of these abominable customs that were practiced before you, and never to make yourselves unclean by them: I am the Lord your God."
43. For more information on Freud, including the shortcomings of his research, see James W. Kalat, *Introduction to Psychology* (Belmont, CA: Wadsworth, 2011), 500–506.
44. C. S. Lewis calls a lie the idea that "any sexual act to which you are tempted at the moment is also healthy and normal." C. S. Lewis, *Mere Christianity* (New York: HarperOne, 1952), 100. Armand M. Nicholi Jr., *The Question of God: C. S. Lewis and Sigmund Freud Debate God, Love, Sex, and the Meaning of Life* (New York: Free Press, 2002), 137.
45. G. A. Cooke, *The Book of Ezekiel*, International Critical Commentary (Edinburgh: T&T Clark, 1967), 199, quoted in Kaiser, *Toward an Old Testament Theology*, 112.
46. Goheen and Bartholomew, *Living at the Crossroads*, 47.
47. Kaiser, *Toward an Old Testament Theology*, 117.
48. See Alvin Schmidt, *How Christianity Changed the World* (Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2004). See chapter 3: "Christianity Elevates Sexual Morality."
49. Nicholi, *The Question of God*.
50. Nicholi, *The Question of God*, 137.
51. Nicholi, *The Question of God*, 141–42.
52. Nicholi, *The Question of God*, 142–43.
53. Nicholi, *The Question of God*, 158.
54. Nicholi, *The Question of God*, 158.
55. Schmidt, *How Christianity Changed the World*, 83.
56. See Schmidt, *How Christianity Changed the World*, 83.
57. Charles Colson, *Against the Night: Living in the New Dark Ages* (Ann Arbor, MI: Servant, 1989), 151–52.
58. D. A. Carson, *The Gagging of God: Christianity Confronts Pluralism* (Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 1996), 365.
59. See Genesis 16. It was the custom at the time for a woman who could not conceive to give her servant to her husband and claim the child as her legal heir.
60. It is interesting that in the exodus, Israel went from one state of servitude to another. Exodus 4:23 says, "Let my son go that he may serve me." The Israelites were to be let go, not so that they would no longer serve but that they would serve God rather than the Pharaoh (see Exod. 7:16; 8:1, 20; 9:1, 13; 10:3, 7, 8, 11, 24, 26). The issue was less where they were coming from than what they were going to: as God's son and servant, the Israelites should be free from Pharaoh because they belonged to God.
61. Genesis 1:26–27: "God said, 'Let us make man in our image, after our likeness. And let them have dominion over the fish of the sea and over the birds of the heavens and over the livestock and over all the earth and over every creeping thing that creeps on the earth.' So God created man in his own image, in the image of God he created him; male and female he created them."
62. Job 31:13–14: "If I have rejected the cause of my manservant or my maidservant, when they brought a complaint against me, what then shall I do when God rises up? When he makes inquiry, what shall I answer him?"
63. Romans 16:16: "Greet one another with a holy kiss. All the churches of Christ greet you."
64. See Aristotle, *Politics* 1.3–6 and *Nicomachean Ethics* 8.11.
65. Galatians 3:28: "There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither slave nor free, there is no male and female, for you are all one in Christ Jesus"; 1 Corinthians 12:13: "In one Spirit we were all baptized into one body—Jews or Greeks, slaves or free—and all were made to drink of one Spirit"; Colossians 3:11: "Here there is not Greek and Jew, circumcised and uncircumcised, barbarian, Scythian, slave, free; but Christ is all, and in all."
66. Philemon v. 16: "... no longer as a bondservant but more than a bondservant, as a beloved brother—especially to me, but how much more to you, both in the flesh and in the Lord."
67. Revelation 18:11–13: "The merchants of the earth weep and mourn for her, since no one buys their cargo anymore, cargo of gold, silver, jewels, pearls, fine linen, purple cloth, silk, scarlet cloth, all kinds of scented wood, all kinds of articles of ivory, all kinds of articles of costly wood, bronze, iron and marble, cinnamon, spice, incense, myrrh, frankincense, wine, oil, fine flour, wheat, cattle and sheep, horses and chariots, and slaves, that is, human souls."
68. Ezekiel 27:13: "Javan, Tubal, and Meshech traded with you; they exchanged human beings and vessels of bronze for your merchandise."
69. 1 Timothy 1:9–10: "The law is not laid down for the just but for the lawless and disobedient, for the ungodly and sinners, for the unholy and profane, for those who strike their fathers and mothers, for murderers, the sexually immoral, men who practice homosexuality, enslavers, liars, perjurers, and whatever else is contrary to sound doctrine."
70. Christopher J. H. Wright, *Old Testament Ethics for the People of God* (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity, 2004), 333.
71. Sean McDowell and Jonathan Morrow, *Is God Just a Human Invention? And Seventeen Other Questions Raised by the New Atheists* (Grand Rapids, MI: Kregel, 2010), 150.
72. John Mark Reynolds, "Does the Bible Endorse Slavery?," in *The Apologetics Study Bible for Students*, ed. Sean McDowell and the Holman Bible Staff (Nashville: Holman, 2014), 1322.
73. Isaiah 61:1–2: "The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because the Lord has anointed me to bring good news to the poor; he has sent me to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to those who are bound; to proclaim the year of the Lord's favor, and the day of vengeance of our God; to comfort all who mourn."
74. See Rodney Stark, *For the Glory of God: How Monotheism Led to Reformations, Science, Witch-Hunts, and the End of Slavery* (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2003), chap. 4.
75. McDowell and Morrow, *Is God Just a Human Invention?*, 154–55.
76. Rodney Stark, *The Rise of Christianity: A Sociologist Reconsiders History* (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1996), 102.
77. Schmidt, *How Christianity Changed the World*, 100.
78. Deuteronomy 21:10–14: "When you go out to war against your enemies, and the Lord your God gives them into your hand and you take them captive, and you see among the captives a beautiful woman, and you desire to take her to be your wife, and you bring her home to your house, she shall shave her head and pare her nails. And she shall take off the clothes in which she was captured and shall remain in your house and lament her father and her mother a full month. After that you may go in to her and be her husband, and she shall be your wife. But if you no longer delight in her, you shall let her go where she wants. But you shall not sell her for money, nor shall you treat her as a slave, since you have humiliated her."
79. Acts 16:14–15: "One who heard us was a woman named Lydia, from the city of Thyatira, a seller of purple goods, who was a worshiper of God. The Lord opened her heart to pay attention to what was said by Paul. And after she was baptized, and her household as well, she urged us, saying, 'If you have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come to my house and stay.' And she prevailed upon us"; Acts 16:40: "They went out of the prison and visited Lydia. And when they had seen the brothers, they encouraged them and departed"; 1 Corinthians 1:11: "It has been reported to me by Chloe's people that there is quarreling among you, my brothers"; Philippians 4:2–3: "I entreat Euodia and I entreat Syntyche to agree in the Lord. Yes, I ask you also, true companion, help these women, who have labored side by side with me in the gospel together with Clement and the rest of my fellow workers, whose names are in the book of life"; Colossians 4:15: "Give my greetings to the brothers at Laodicea, and to Nympha and the church in her house."
80. Stark, *The Rise of Christianity*, 100.
81. Eckhart Tolle, *A New Earth: Awakening to Your Life's Purpose* (New York: Plume, 2005), 156.
82. Carl Sagan, *Demon-Haunted World: Science as a Candle in the Dark* (New York: Ballantine, 1997), 122.
83. Mary Daly, *Gyn/Ecology: The Meta-Ethics of Radical Feminism* (Boston: Beacon, 1990), 183.
84. Philip J. Sampson, *6 Modern Myths about Christianity and Western Civilization* (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity, 2000), 137.
85. The full account of the Salem witch trials is complex and at times baffling, involving a perfect storm of war, economic uncertainty, disease, paranoia, and political calculation. What seems undisputed now is that witch trials came to an end after the people of Salem awakened to the evil they had carried out. See the account by a professor of history at Salem State University, Emerson W. Baker, *A Storm of Witchcraft* (New York: Oxford University Press, 2015), particularly chap. 7, "An Inextinguishable Flame."
86. McDowell and Morrow, *Is God Just a Human Invention?*, 229.
87. Alex McFarland, *Ten Answers for Skeptics* (Ventura, CA: Regal, 2011), 173–74.
88. Timothy Keller, *Galatians for You: For Reading, for Feeding, for Leading* (Surrey, England: The Good Book Company, 2013), 55.
89. Brian Jones, *Hell Is Real: But I Hate to Admit It* (Colorado Springs, CO: David C Cook, 2011), 147.
90. Jones, *Hell Is Real*, 148.
91. Tim Keller, "Reason for God," *The Explorer*, Veritas Forum, Fall 2008, quoted in Copan, *Is God a Moral Monster?*, 222.
