<!-- page-431 -->

# If Christianity Is True, Why Do People Walk Away?

## 1. Crisis of Faith

As a teenager, my friend Sean McDowell had a crisis of faith. And because Sean's dad is the world-renowned evangelist Josh McDowell, this event might have morphed into a family crisis. But instead of panicking about his reputation or Sean's faith, Josh told him, "Son, I'm excited for you. It's great to explore answers to these questions. I just ask one thing: don't reject Christianity without *knowing* that it is untrue." Instead of ignoring Sean's doubts, his dad took them seriously, giving Sean space to search for answers. As a result, Sean's faith grew stronger.

Sean's dad was right when he said it's great to explore the answers to ultimate questions. Too many people make decisions without good reasons or even blame others for their own failure to think things through. People say such things as "My friends *caused* me to reject my faith" or "My parents got divorced and that *caused* me to walk away." Even when someone says something like "I was raised Hindu, which is what *causes* me to be a Hindu," that person is not giving reasons for his or her actions but is acting as if she had no choice in the matter. *Causes* are not necessarily *reasons*.

According to worldview scholar James Sire, talking about what we were *caused* to do is a way of evading responsibility.<sup>1</sup> On the other hand, if a person responds to the question "Why do you believe as you do?" by saying, "This worldview explains reality and answers my tough questions," this person is giving reasons and showing clear thinking. It's a way of taking responsibility; it is a mature thing to do.

As we've seen throughout this volume, Christianity has good reasons on its side. It is reasonable to believe that a supreme mind has always existed, that he created the universe, and that we might come to know this creator personally.

Yet we may still wonder, *If Christianity is really true, why don't more people believe it, and why do some people who profess belief walk away at some point in their lives?*

We should note, though, that we're *not* asking whether people's level of belief determines Christianity's truth. As professor Paul Copan points out, the truth of Christianity does not depend on whether we know it, admit it, agree about it, follow it, or grasp it.<sup>2</sup> If something is true, it is true when we don't like it as well as when we do.

> **The truth of Christianity does not depend on whether we know it, admit it, agree about it, follow it, or grasp it. If something is true, it is true when we don't like it as well as when we do.**

What we *are* asking is, *Why do people not find compelling the reasonable arguments for the Christian faith we've discussed in this book?*

Well, for one thing, there are reasonable-sounding arguments for other viewpoints. But as we will see, there is something besides reason at work in most peoples' decision-making processes. People find evidence persuasive only if they are *willing* to be informed, *willing* to abandon conflicting commitments, and *willing* to align their lives with God's revealed truth. These acts of the will are often very difficult for people to achieve.

Scripture tells us in Romans 1:21 that people will turn away from perfectly good reasons: "For although they knew God, they did not honor him as God or give thanks to him, but they became futile in their thinking, and their foolish hearts were darkened." It's like a person with a disabling brain tumor trying to self-diagnose his own malady: the very faculty by which he would try to think clearly about his problem is the very faculty whose injury prevents him from doing so.

How much of a problem is it that people walk away from the Christian faith? Although church attendance isn't *everything*, it is a helpful and accurate indicator of who identifies as Christian, and today more and more people experience crises of faith and drop out of church. Such crises of faith are pandemic: one study found that 70 percent of those who regularly

<!-- page-432 -->

attended youth group in their teens stopped attending church regularly for at least a year when they left home.<sup>3</sup>

Probably the most helpful way to think about crises of faith is to view them as crises of *trust*. As author Dave Sterrett explains, in the midst of relationship problems, spiritual dilemmas, and intellectual doubts, people commonly look around, find nonbelievers getting along okay, and ask, *Can I really trust God to help me with these difficulties?*<sup>4</sup>

There are, of course, different kinds of disbelief. For example, some people say their disbelief is due to cultural differences. Others disbelieve because they were talked out of faith. Others just stop believing because of some kind of doubt. The questions we will address are *Why do people stop believing? What should we do with our personal doubts? And what is God's answer to doubt and disbelief?* Let's dig in to see if we can find answers.

## 2. Doubts Come from Lack of Foundational Knowledge

Some people stop believing in Christianity because they just don't know enough to do any differently. Their beliefs are not based on knowledge to begin with. In America, around 85 percent of people say they believe in God. Because around three-fourths of Americans identify with a Christian denomination,<sup>5</sup> most of these would say they are Christian. However, around half of Americans (53 percent) see God as a "cosmic force."<sup>6</sup> God clearly reveals himself in Scripture as a person, so people who describe him primarily as a force have either embraced a non-Christian theology or are uninformed. Christians are not immune to ignorance. According to a Pew Research Center study, atheists as a group knew the most and Christians as a group knew the least on a basic test of religious knowledge.<sup>7</sup>

> Some people stop believing in Christianity because they just don't know enough to do any differently. Their beliefs are not based on knowledge to begin with.

Being uninformed can itself be a source of doubt. English author Os Guinness says that when people embrace a wrong view of God, they end up blaming God for their own faulty picture of reality. "Unable to see God as he is, they cannot trust him as they should, and doubt is the result," he says.<sup>8</sup>

I saw this kind of distrust firsthand when a lady approached me at a conference to say, "I don't want to teach my children that God is always there. It sounds creepy." To her, God is like Santa Claus, who, as the old song says, "knows if you've been bad or good, so be good *for goodness' sake*."<sup>9</sup> I'm sure creepiness was not on the minds of John Frederick Coots and Haven Gillespie when they wrote the song featuring those lyrics, "Santa Claus Is Coming to Town."<sup>10</sup> But the upbeat melody disguises a vaguely threatening theology that Santa's watching you to punish or reward you. Uninformed people believe that God is like Santa. No wonder they feel freedom in giving up belief in him.

Giving up belief in God is not like switching a light from "on" to "off." Unbelief represents shakiness in a person's answers to life's ultimate questions. Think of a set of building blocks. If the blocks at the base are unstable, the blocks at the top will wobble. Often people experience a crisis of belief when they have an inadequate foundation and their "knowledge blocks" pile up faster than their foundation can support. If people start with an inadequate understanding

<!-- page-433 -->

of God, they'll grow more confused with every piece of unintegrated information they gain. Proverbs 18:17 says, "The one who states his case first seems right, until the other comes and examines him." Those who grow up in church but never grapple with hard questions often find themselves at the receiving end of this proverb.

I experienced this myself as a university student. I heard a psychology professor parrot Sigmund Freud's idea that people believe in God because of wish fulfillment. In other words, Freud taught that weak-minded people are fearful of the world and wish for a great father figure to protect them, so they invent God. "Thus the benevolent rule of a divine Providence allays our fear of the danger of life," Freud said.<sup>11</sup>

At the time, it sounded like a good theory. Who hasn't felt a sense of fear and wished for protection from someone bigger? Fortunately, a professor named Paul Vitz helped me see that it could be the reverse—that perhaps Freud's strained relationship with his own father led him to attack the idea of God as a father. After all, Freud's argument isn't really an argument; it's an assertion purporting to explain why we have a desire for God, with no particular bearing on whether God actually exists. It's a fairly simple observation on Vitz's part, but it helped shore up my basis for belief.

But be careful to shore up your faith with strong arguments, not just slogans. When young Christians come across arguments against Christianity, they are tempted to shore up their thinking with whatever little bits of knowledge they find compelling at the time rather than develop a deep understanding of the problem and a humble, articulate response. As Basil Mitchell, a professor of philosophy at Oxford, put it, "Many ordinary people, particularly young people, [are] quite happy to adopt a pragmatic, utilitarian attitude to society at large, and to meet the crises of personal life with odd and often inconsistent scraps of 'philosophy' picked up from anywhere and claiming no universal truth or even relevance."<sup>12</sup>

So one reason people walk away from their faith is that they lack a proper knowledge base and grow more unstable through time. Often this lack of knowledge is compounded by a misunderstanding of what belief actually is. This leads us to a second reason people walk away.

> **One reason people walk away from their faith is that they lack a proper knowledge base and grow more unstable through time.**

## 3. Doubts Come from a Misunderstanding of What Belief Is About

Many people turn away from Christianity when their understanding of belief itself breaks down. People embrace one of what my friend Mark Mittelberg describes as different "faith paths." There are six such paths:

1. The "relativistic faith path" says that truth is *what you make it.*

2. The "traditional faith path" says that truth is *what you've always been taught.*

3. The "authoritarian faith path" says that truth is *what you've been told to believe.*

<!-- page-434 -->

4. The "intuitive faith path" says that truth is *what you feel in your heart.*

5. The "mystical faith path" says that truth is *what you think God told you personally.*

6. The "evidential faith path" says that truth is *what logic and evidence point to.*<sup>13</sup>

Of these six, Mittelberg says, only the last one accurately represents the biblical idea of a believing faith. His intent in focusing on logic and evidence is not to diminish the work of the Holy Spirit in securing salvation (Eph. 1:13) but rather to point out that other paths have the most potential for distorting belief by making it a matter of personal preference, tradition, or feeling. People who walk along one of the other faith paths are more likely to question Christianity's uniqueness to the point of changing their convictions.

If you find yourself objecting to the idea that only one of these paths is legitimate, you're not alone. Most people think of faith as believing in something without good reasons.<sup>14</sup> As we saw earlier in this volume, though, the Christian view of **faith** is trusting in what we have good reason to believe is true.<sup>15</sup> Christian faith is not opposed to knowledge, but acting—indeed, *trusting*—in accordance with what we know.

> *Faith:* firm trust or confidence in someone or something.

The Bible does not discourage *knowing* things as a foundation of belief. In fact, it encourages it. Isaiah 43:10–11 says, "'You are my witnesses,' declares the LORD, 'and my servant whom I have chosen, that you may *know* and *believe* me and *understand* that I am he. Before me no god was formed, nor shall there be any after me. I, I am the LORD, and besides me there is no savior.'" John 20:30–31 says, "Jesus did many other signs in the presence of the disciples, which are not written in this book; but these are written so that you may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that by believing you may have life in his name." The Bible itself encourages us to believe based on the presence of knowledge and evidence rather than its absence.

Yet even if people understand what belief is all about and acknowledge that Christianity is based in a real understanding of the world, they still might refuse to believe because they're holding on to something they don't want to give up. This leads us to a third reason people walk away.

## 4. Doubts Come from Conflicting Commitments

Some people don't want to embrace Christianity because they are committed to ideas or lifestyles they don't want to abandon. They think, *If the Bible is true, then I'm in trouble. I don't want to change my lifestyle or behavior, so instead I'm going to try to ignore what the Bible says.* If you meet someone who opposes Christianity, you might ask, "What are you afraid would happen to you if you became a Christian?" Often it isn't about good reasons at all; it's about not wanting to pay the cost in lifestyle, reputation, or family harmony.<sup>16</sup>

"Not wanting to pay the cost" happens more often than you might think, even among atheists, who we might not expect to admit it. In chapter 11, we heard from Harvard University biologist Richard Lewontin, who admits that his unwillingness to "allow a Divine Foot in the door" led

<!-- page-435 -->

him to embrace science "in spite of the patent absurdity of some of its constructs, *in spite of* its failure to fulfill many of its extravagant promises of health and life, *in spite of* the tolerance of the scientific community for unsubstantiated just-so stories."<sup>17</sup>

Thomas Nagel, professor of philosophy at New York University, is even more pointed: "It isn't that I don't believe in God and naturally hope that I'm right in my beliefs, it's that I hope there is no God. I don't want there to be a God. I don't want the universe to be like that."<sup>18</sup>

You'll run into a lot of professors like Lewontin and Nagel at secular colleges, where Christian belief is rare among faculty.<sup>19</sup> This high level of unbelief, in turn, creates strong pressure for students to avoid beliefs of which their respected professors might disapprove. To paraphrase the late journalist Upton Sinclair, it is difficult to get a person to believe something when his grade depends upon his not believing it.<sup>20</sup>

The Bible itself acknowledges that many will turn away simply because they are unwilling to pay the cost. In Luke 14:27–30, Jesus said,

> Whoever does not bear his own cross and come after me cannot be my disciple. For which of you, desiring to build a tower, does not first sit down and count the cost, whether he has enough to complete it? Otherwise, when he has laid a foundation and is not able to finish, all who see it begin to mock him, saying, "This man began to build and was not able to finish."

Some don't count the cost. Others count it, and realize they don't want to pay it. Either way, their reasons for walking away have less to do with intellectual consideration than with a desire to hold on to a particular lifestyle or maintain the respect of people they want to have like them. The focus on personal comfort leads us to a fourth reason for walking away: people simply have become comfortable living as if God does not exist.

## 5. Doubts Come from Practical Atheism

Research by the Pew Research Center shows that among people eighteen to twenty-nine years of age, one-third claims no religious affiliation.<sup>21</sup> This figure has tripled in the last three decades. According to professor Craig Gay, the central problem is not the high number of atheists but rather the high number of those who live as if God has no bearing on their lives. Gay calls this **practical atheism** and says, "Under modern conditions the question of God is simply irrelevant to so much of what we do on a daily basis that it eventually drops out of mind and heart. God is simply forgotten."<sup>22</sup>

> *Practical Atheism:* believing in the existence of God but living as if he doesn't exist.

Many people, when asked about questions of faith, say, "Everything is going just fine; I don't need faith." However, people who make this point probably do not realize what they're actually saying:

- To say things are "fine" is usually to say that one's own life is relatively trouble free. But is this a good criterion for a meaningful life?

<!-- page-436 -->

- Is the person saying that everything is fine in the *world* or just in his or her own life? It seems selfish to make life about personal satisfaction rather than about making life better for others.

- Why would a person think that Christianity is only for times of trouble? That's a misunderstanding of what the gospel is all about.

Many embrace practical atheism because they either will not or cannot see the world from God's perspective and embrace the culturally approved way of living because it just seems like the acceptable thing to do.<sup>23</sup>

But how do people arrive at the idea of a culturally approved way of living? Christian apologist Charles Kraft theorizes that it is a matter of what we train ourselves to pay attention to. Of all the things that happen, he says, we acknowledge only that which we believe to be possible. Of what we believe to be possible, we acknowledge only those things we can directly experience. Of the things we experience, we acknowledge only those things we can analyze. Out of this, we form our view of reality.<sup>24</sup>

Here's what this constrained view of reality looks like visually:

All that happens → What we believe is possible → What we experience → What we analyze → Our view of reality

Before explaining how this truncated way of seeing relates to faith, let's try to understand the concept itself through a baseball example. The Chicago Cubs baseball team is known as the "lovable losers" because they have not won a World Series in 104 years, the longest losing streak of any North American team in any professional sport. Let's say that someone rushed up and announced, "The Chicago Cubs have won the World Series!" Assuming you had no contradictory evidence, you might reason this way:

1. The Cubs did *not*, in fact, win the World Series.

2. The Cubs *cannot* win in the regular season, so clearly they *cannot* win in the World Series.

3. I have never *seen* the Chicago Cubs win a World Series, so it didn't happen.

4. It is impossible to *imagine* the Cubs winning the World Series, so it didn't happen.

5. Therefore, I know you think the Cubs won the World Series, *but you must be mistaken.*

<!-- page-437 -->

Now let's apply this thinking to something supernatural, such as a miraculous healing. Here's how someone who believes that miracles cannot occur might make sense of such a claim:

1. The miracle didn't happen.

2. I do not believe that miracles are possible, so this particular miracle didn't happen.

3. I have never seen a miracle, so it didn't happen.

4. Miraculous healings are scientifically impossible, so this particular miracle didn't happen.

5. Therefore, I know you think a miraculous healing occurred, but it did not.

Can you see how this kind of thinking might lead to practical atheism? Rather than try to make sense of all of life, practical atheists confine their analysis to their own personal spiritual experiences, which in turn shapes their wills. Conveniently, living this way avoids rocking the boat. Unfortunately, it also avoids thoughtful reflection. As C. S. Lewis said in his sermon "The Weight of Glory," "We are half-hearted creatures, fooling about with drink and sex and ambition when infinite joy is offered us, like an ignorant child who wants to go on making mud pies in a slum because he cannot imagine what is meant by the offer of a holiday at the sea. We are far too easily pleased."<sup>25</sup>

Practical atheism, then, is not so much a rebellion against God as it is a very small view of what is really going on in the world.<sup>26</sup> It's not merely a failure of reason; it is a failure of imagination.

Practical atheism can be hereditary. In a widely discussed article about the impact of families on faith, Catholic priest Robbie Low analyzed a report from Switzerland about church attendance habits reported by parents and their adult children. Here's Low's stunning conclusion: "There is one critical factor. It is overwhelming, and it is this: It is the religious practice of the father of the family that, above all, determines the future attendance at or absence from church of the children."<sup>27</sup> The study further revealed that where neither parent practices their religion faithfully, "only 4 percent of children will become regular attenders and 15 percent irregulars. Eighty percent will be lost to the faith."<sup>28</sup>

Practical atheism has long roots that grow deeper with each passing generation. Perhaps the longest root, though, is in the area of morality. This leads us to a fifth reason people walk away from the faith: personal sin.

## 6. Doubts Come from Sin's Effects

<!-- page-438 -->

The word *moral* comes from the Greek *moralis*, which author Steven Garber says, referencing Scottish philosopher Alasdair MacIntyre, is "about the formation of character, about developing dispositions 'to behave systematically in one way rather than another.'"<sup>29</sup> People's moral stances come from their view of God and in turn affect their views on everything, from science to government to issues such as adultery, gay marriage, and abortion.<sup>30</sup> In a moment of brutal honesty, the author of *Brave New World*, Aldous Huxley, openly revealed the relationship between his view of reality and his moral choices:

> I wanted to believe the Darwinian idea. I chose to believe it not because I think there was enormous evidence for it, nor because I believed it had the full authority to give interpretation to my origins, but I chose to believe it because it delivered me from trying to find meaning and freed me to my own erotic passions.<sup>31</sup>

Huxley's comments about his erotic passions are more than just incidental to his argument. The effects of sin are particularly potent when it comes to sexuality. Our sexual choices deeply affect our worldview and thus our lives. A study of Christian young men, for example, found that those who reported using pornography also reported lower levels of religious practice, lower self-worth, lower identity development regarding dating, and higher levels of depression.<sup>32</sup>

> A study of Christian young men found that those who reported using pornography also reported lower levels of religious practice, lower self-worth, lower identity development regarding dating, and higher levels of depression.

Sin is a distortion of love. We sin when we love things wrongly at the wrong time in the wrong way. In a study of the faith of twentysomethings, sociologists Jeremy Uecker, Mark Regnerus, and Margaret Vaaler found that although young people can return to faith from just about every life circumstance, certain life habits—such as cohabitation, fornication (sexual intercourse outside of marriage), drug use, and alcohol abuse—all accelerate diminished religiosity.<sup>33</sup> This is further evidence that our lifestyle choices affect our relationships with God.

Let's return to the question of sexual sin for a moment. Because almost all humans experience sexual desire, and because this desire is tangled up with our understanding of love, sexual sin is a common area in which the biblical idea of love gets distorted. As we saw earlier in this volume, God's love for us and our love for him is the central plotline of the entire human story. As theologian and pastor John MacArthur affirms, "God's love is the single central principle that defines the Christian's entire duty."<sup>34</sup>

How does sexual sin cut against true love? In both Romans 13:8–10 and Galatians 5:14,<sup>35</sup> the apostle Paul says that the commandments are summed up in the command to love our neighbors. This kind of love involves kindness, tenderheartedness, and forgiveness (Eph. 4:32).<sup>36</sup> As MacArthur emphasizes, "True love is always sacrificial, self-giving, merciful, compassionate, sympathetic, kind, generous, and patient."<sup>37</sup>

To truly love, one must reject love's counterfeits, which include the following:

- Immorality: the Greek word *porneia* includes every kind of sexual sin.

<!-- page-439 -->

- Impurity: the Greek word *akatharsia* refers to filth, crudeness, and perversion.

- Covetousness: a narcissistic focus on self-gratification.<sup>38</sup>

> True love gives. Counterfeit love takes. True love builds up. Counterfeit love tears down. True love takes a long-term view. Counterfeit love focuses on only short-term pleasure. True love treats people as persons. Counterfeit love treats people as objects.

True love gives. Counterfeit love takes. True love builds up. Counterfeit love tears down. True love takes a long-term view. Counterfeit love focuses on only short-term pleasure. True love treats people as persons. Counterfeit love treats people as objects. For these reasons, habitually indulging a distorted idea of love has serious consequences.

Many people never get to the place where they can think deeply about sin in this way. Why? They're not attentive. This leads us to a sixth reason people walk away from faith.

## 7. Doubts Come from Distraction

<!-- page-440 -->

The average American sees as many as five thousand advertising messages per day, from billboards to T-shirts to web pop-ups to television ads.<sup>39</sup> Advertisers roll beaches with indentations of their logos, project ads onto walls at sporting events, wrap buses and buildings with product pictures, and even use parking stripes, streetlights, manhole covers, toilets, mirrors, and floors as advertising spaces.

And it's not just visual ads. Every move you make online is tracked by advertisers who then target you with things they want you to buy. New breakthroughs even make it possible to identify your age, race, and gender when walking through the mall and to instantly customize electronic billboards to feature ads that people like you have found compelling. This new technology can, for example, discern whether a shopper is a teenage girl and feature a special price on something teen girls like that is available in a store just a few steps ahead. Very soon advertisers will even be able to merge the virtual and real worlds, using your social media profiles to recognize your face when you go shopping and offer you special deals from nearby stores.<sup>40</sup>

Some people find this kind of advertising an annoying invasion of privacy. Others appreciate the convenience. Either way, we might easily get the impression that life is about buying things, shifting our identities from being producers to being consumers.

We can concentrate on only so much. If we pay too much attention to our consumer appetites, we can't pay attention to more meaningful pursuits. Life today is, as the Chuck Colson Center's John Stonestreet puts it, "the drowning of truth in perpetual noise."<sup>41</sup> Journalist Maggie Jackson sees tremendous danger in a culture "increasingly shaped by distraction":

> **We can concentrate on only so much. If we pay too much attention to our consumer appetites, we can't pay attention to more meaningful pursuits.**

> This is why we are less and less able to see, hear, and comprehend what's relevant and permanent, why so many of us feel that we can barely keep our heads above water, and our days are marked by perpetual loose ends. What's more, the waning of our powers of attention is occurring at such a rate and in so many areas of life, that the erosion is reaching critical mass. We are on the verge of losing our capacity as a society for deep, sustained focus. In short, we are slipping toward a new dark age.<sup>42</sup>

Distraction makes selfishness and laziness easy. The Internet slang expression "tl;dr" ("too long, didn't read") reveals much, emphasizing, *You must make yourself instantly accessible to me. If not, I will ignore you.*

Just about every form of knowledge, religious or otherwise, requires our careful attention. In fact, God has designed our brains such that our sustained attention best ensures our joy and sense of meaning. Here's a brief summary of some of the research:

> Just about every form of knowledge, religious or otherwise, requires our careful attention.

<!-- page-441 -->

- **Organizing your thoughts can bring pleasure.** The frontal lobe of your brain helps you plan and strategize. In your brain's limbic system, called the *nucleus accumbens*, a collection of neurons are activated when you experience pleasure. Stimulating activity in your frontal lobe in turn stimulates the limbic system, bringing a sense of pleasure, which is why you can occasionally find yourself working hard on something and enjoying it even though the work is difficult. The brain is actually designed to *work* and enjoy it.

- **Meditating and praying can bring pleasure.** Andrew Newberg, from the Thomas Jefferson University and Hospital in Pennsylvania, has conducted studies measuring blood flow as people meditate or pray. He has found that the more that people meditate and pray, the more activity there is in the frontal lobe and the limbic system (which give a person a feeling of pleasure). During this activity, the parietal lobe of the brain, which is sensitive to space and time, goes dim.<sup>43</sup> Perhaps you've had the experience of concentrating hard on something and losing track of time and space. The brain is actually designed to *concentrate* and enjoy it.

- **Communicating our thoughts can bring pleasure.** David Caplan, a neurologist from Massachusetts General Hospital, discovered that the mechanisms that trigger language use require motivation and arousal.<sup>44</sup> In other words, if you're thinking hard and enjoying it, you'll be able to communicate more vividly about it. The brain is actually designed to *communicate* and enjoy it.

Today's media-saturated culture makes it difficult to give the kind of sustained attention that leads to this kind of joy. In fact, some technology can actually have a counterproductive effect. For example, medical doctor and psychologist Leonard Sax reviewed a study of boys ages seven to fourteen years old who played a lot of video games. He found that video games shut off blood flow to the brain's executive center while stimulating the brain's pleasure center. This gave the players a feeling of reward at having achieved great objectives without actually accomplishing anything in the real world.<sup>45</sup>

In other words, being distracted through mediated experiences—not just advertisements but also movies, video games, or other technology—can actually have the effect of diminishing thoughtfulness, communication, and the capacity for spiritual reflection. When people lose their ability to think well, this leads them to stop paying attention to what is really true and worth believing. They may even question whether there is anything worth believing.

## 8. Dealing with Doubt

<!-- page-442 -->

Even without such distractions, doubt is normal.<sup>46</sup> According to Christian educator Ben Williams, "Doubt is not a Christian problem; it's a human problem."<sup>47</sup> If you're experiencing doubt, you might be comforted by knowing that practically every scriptural hero experienced doubt, from Abraham to Job to Moses to David to Jeremiah to the disciples.

The sheer number of people in our culture today who doubt Christianity's truth can make Christians feel that their doubt is more real than the truth. The solution to doubts both simple and complex is that *we must doubt our doubts as much as we doubt the truth we doubt.*

When he speaks on doubt, Brett Kunkle asks audiences to write down their top three intellectual questions or objections to God, Jesus, the Bible, or Christianity; their top three hurts; and the top three sins they currently struggle with. As his audience members complete the exercise, they often realize that their intellectual questions, hurts, and sins are related. To see how, let's look at each in turn.

### *Intellectual Doubt*

Many Christian believers look around the world and say to themselves, *Most people don't believe what I believe, so either I am wrong or they are wrong. How could so many people, especially smart people I know, be wrong?* Ironically, a humble desire not to proclaim our "rightness" may lead us to accept arguments against Christianity we otherwise might not find compelling.

The first response to **intellectual doubt**—or entertaining intellectual reasons for rejecting faith, such as wondering whether evolution proves that no God created the universe—is, Kunkle says, to write down your doubts. Second, go through them one by one, praying for God to tear down the strongholds of doubt and enable you to live a life pleasing to Christ (2 Cor. 10:3–5).<sup>48</sup> Third, search out the matter by reading books and talking with mature, informed Christians.

> *Intellectual Doubt:* spiritual doubt brought about by rational questions regarding God's existence.

If you find yourself in conversation with others who are expressing intellectual doubts, especially if they are being sarcastic or mean, remember that behind almost all "intellectual" doubts are personal areas of pain or resistance. Keep this in mind: "Love is patient and kind; love does not envy or boast; it is not arrogant or rude" (1 Cor. 13:4–5).

### *Emotional Doubt*

Intellectual doubt is often tied to **emotional doubt**, such as questioning God's goodness or doubting one's salvation. Sometimes, Kunkle says, unresolved pain leads to anger and thus doubt. About these kinds of doubts, author Os Guinness says,

> *Emotional Doubt:* spiritual doubt brought about by pain, anger, or angst.

> Out-voted, out-gunned, faith is pressed back and hemmed in by the unruly mob of raging emotions that only a while earlier were quiet, orderly citizens of the personality. Reason is cut down, obedience is thrown out, and for a while the rule of emotions is as sovereign as it is violent. The coup d'etat is complete.<sup>49</sup>

<!-- page-443 -->

We deal with emotional doubts in much the same way that we deal with intellectual doubts. First, we recognize our doubts and pray through them, acknowledging that emotions, although good, can also turn negative and take over our lives. Second, we practice replacing negative, harmful emotions with biblically rooted, healing ones. Romans 12:21 says, "Do not be overcome by evil, but overcome evil with good." For example, despair must be replaced with hope, anger with forgiveness, anxiety with prayer, selfishness with self-control, and so on. Third, and most important, we lean on others—especially older people in the faith—to listen to and guide us.

### *Moral Doubt*

The third kind of doubt, according to Kunkle, is **moral doubt**. This is the kind of doubt we experience as a result of personal sin, rebellion, and wrongly placed motivation. Psalm 14:1 says, "The fool says in his heart, 'There is no God.' They are corrupt, they do abominable deeds; there is none who does good." This verse is often used as a hammer to criticize nonbelievers, but notice its true intent: corruption, evil, and refusal to do good are associated with a denial of God's existence. This does not mean that atheists are closet ax murderers but instead that a strong correlation exists between someone's personal habits and his or her state of belief.

> *Moral Doubt:* spiritual doubt brought about by personal sin and rebellion.

What should we do if our personal habits are moving us further from God? According to Scripture, we should first confess the moral failing to God and ask for his help in repenting and obtaining forgiveness. First John 1:8–9 says, "If we say we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness." Second, we should confess to others, asking forgiveness. James 5:16 says, "Confess your sins to one another and pray for one another, that you may be healed. The prayer of a righteous person has great power as it is working."

It can be embarrassing at first to admit that we have sin in our lives, but confession to others brings our secrets out into the open. Once it is out in the open, sin loses its controlling power over us. As part of repentance, Williams encourages his students to meditate on Psalm 73:21–26. This passage summarizes how God brings us out of bitterness, evil, and ignorance, and into his strengthening presence:

> When my soul was embittered,
> when I was pricked in heart,
> I was brutish and ignorant;
> I was like a beast toward you.
>
> Nevertheless, I am continually with you;
> you hold my right hand.

<!-- page-444 -->

> You guide me with your counsel,
> and afterward you will receive me to glory.
> Whom have I in heaven but you?
>     And there is nothing on earth that I desire besides you.
> My flesh and my heart may fail,
>     but God is the strength of my heart and my portion forever.

Doubt your doubts as much as you doubt the truth you're doubting. And remember that even in your doubt, God cares for you and guides you. There's one more thing to mention, and it is the very thing that ties everything else together.

## 9. God's Answer to Unbelief: The Church

Many young Christians struggle in their faith because they've never seen what it looks like for someone to fully live out a Christian worldview. One college student confided in me, "I've been going to the same church my whole life and there are people there who have attended for forty years and it has never made any difference in their lives. Why should I continue going?"

I shared with this young man what he probably already knew: that we shouldn't measure the truth of God's plan for the world based on how fallen people live. This would be like blaming a car designer for my poor driving or faulting the design of a piece of furniture when I fail to assemble it according to the instructions. It's true that people are flawed. God wants us to focus on his Son more than on the flawed people around us. When the apostle Peter asked Jesus about God's plan for another person, Jesus said to him, "What is that to you? You follow me!" (John 21:22). Each person has to answer the question "What do you do with Jesus?" I can't answer that question for you, nor can you answer it for me. As C. S. Lewis said through the Aslan character in *The Horse and His Boy*, "No one is told any story but their own."<sup>50</sup>

> As C. S. Lewis said through the Aslan character in *The Horse and His Boy*, "No one is told any story but their own."

At the same time, I share the student's frustration. We know that what we *believe* connects with what we *do*. Garber was once asked by an anxious twentysomething, "But what does this have to do with where I work?"<sup>51</sup> It's a valid question. Who would want a worldview that can't be lived out in daily life?<sup>52</sup> "For individuals to flourish they need to be part of a community of character," Garber insists, "one which has a reason for being that can provide meaning and coherence between the personal and the public worlds."<sup>53</sup>

Where should we look to find a worldview robust enough for a fruitful, victorious life? There is one answer and one answer only: in the church. Not just in *a* church, as in a particular church building, but also in the universal church, the body of Christ. As odd as it seems, God works through flawed people all over the world, each of whom is flailing like a child learning to walk, steadied by an ever-patient God.

Sociologists Peter Berger and Thomas Luckmann have noted that being together with other believers is one of the key factors that makes a serious faith plausible: "To have a conversion experience is nothing much. The real thing is to be able to keep taking it seriously; to

<!-- page-445 -->

retain a sense of its plausibility. This is where the religious community comes in."<sup>54</sup> The church serves as an "authoritative community" that gives people of all generations a sense of place, nurtures them, helps them grow spiritually, and teaches them to treat those inside and outside the community with dignity and love.

Recent studies have shown the power of authoritative communities in people's lives, helping children and adults live mentally, emotionally, and spiritually healthy lives.<sup>55</sup> Churches ought to be the most purposeful authoritative communities. No church is perfect, but every church ought to consider itself a key to human flourishing, not just a place to go on Sundays. Let me state it even more strongly: church is not a place to practice listening to sermons. It is where we practice the life of the kingdom, which is ours now and forever. This is why it is so important not to just look for a church you find entertaining but to find a place where you can participate fully as a member of the body of Christ in the following areas.

### *Reconciliation*

If we are to love God and love our neighbors, our first duty is to be reconciled to our maker and those others he has made. We will be incomplete as long as we are unable to do this. In *The Problem of Pain*, C. S. Lewis said, "To condone an evil is simply to ignore it, to treat it as if it were good. But forgiveness needs to be accepted as well as offered if it is to be complete: a man who admits no guilt can accept no forgiveness."<sup>56</sup>

Reconciliation with our neighbors takes many forms. For example, many Christians have allowed racial, cultural, generational, and political differences to divide them from their brothers and sisters in Christ. Also, when it comes to dealing with doubt and unbelief, resolving the divide between generations may be of special importance. My own research has found that when the older and younger generations interact with one another in a positive way, it has the effect of reinvigorating the older generation and providing the younger generation with motivation, engagement, prosocial behavior, a healthier lifestyle, and greater spiritual development.<sup>57</sup> It is a shame when such interactions are rare.

In one study, the number one factor explaining the continued church involvement of young people in their twenties was their having had mentors in high school.<sup>58</sup> You need an older mentor if you want to grow.<sup>59</sup>

### *Worship*

In one of America's longest-running academic studies, researchers examined generations of adults to better understand the factors leading to heart disease. Social environment has been found to play a huge role in physical health, and the expression of contentment and happiness is especially important. Researchers found that every *contented* person you know increases your likelihood of being contented by 2 percent. For every *discontented* person you know, your likelihood of being discontented rises 4 percent. In other words, unhappy people are twice as damaging to your state of mind as happy people are good for it.<sup>60</sup>

How does this apply to worship? It's simple. You need to be around contented, happy people who experience the joy of the Lord and worship with all of their hearts. Just as others affect

<!-- page-446 -->

you, you affect them. Your expression of joy, happiness, and contentment is just as contagious as theirs (a negative, shy, or distant attitude is also contagious).

Worship is an offering to God, so worship with your all. Worship leader Matt Redman says that true worshippers "gather beneath the shadow of the Cross, where an undying devotion took the Son of God to His death. Alive now in the power of His resurrection, they respond to such an outpouring with an unquenchable offering of their own."<sup>61</sup>

Worshipping together with other believers ought to be like a family reunion. Of course, reunions are painful for some families, but it is up to each person to bring healing. Our attitudes make an enormous difference.<sup>62</sup>

> **Worshipping together with other believers ought to be like a family reunion. Of course, reunions are painful for some families, but it is up to each person to bring healing.**

Another aspect of worship is the act of communion, which should never be treated as just another ritual. Orthodox theologian Alexander Schmemann says, "The liturgy of the Eucharist is best understood as a journey or procession. It is the journey of the Church into the dimension of the Kingdom."<sup>63</sup> Christian traditions surrounding communion vary significantly, so talk with your pastor about how you might be able to participate more fully in this life-giving act.

### *Community*

Earlier in this volume, we discovered that Scripture considers God's plan for humans "very good" and that the "very goodness" of creation, *tob meod* in Hebrew, means that God's plan is richly and heartbreakingly good. God seeks abundance, and we experience the best of God's abundance in our with-ness—our being *with* others.

The Inklings club provides an intriguing example of with-ness. As a group of authors in Oxford in the 1940s and '50s, the Inklings gathered for friendship and to help improve one another's writing. Twice a week they got together, on Tuesday mornings at the Eagle and Child pub and on Thursday evenings at Magdalen College. Among those in the group were C. S. Lewis and J. R. R. Tolkien. Out of these meetings came Lewis's *Narnia* series and Tolkien's *Lord of the Rings* trilogy, among dozens of other fictional, nonfictional, and poetic works. Without the Inklings, might the world be bereft of some of its most beloved stories?

The Inklings were a form of companionship but also a form of spiritual support for people working in a university where brilliant people routinely mocked God. As Lewis said in a letter to his friend Arthur Greeves, "O for the people who speak one's own language."<sup>64</sup> Although ordinary men with ordinary problems, they were in one sense ordinary men with ordinary difficulties. In the throes of a troubled marriage, Tolkien wrote in his diary, "Friendship with Lewis compensates for much."<sup>65</sup>

The particular kind of community represented by the Inklings is not a form of worship or communion but rather one of hospitality. It is inviting other people into a comfortable space where they can feel both personally challenged and safe. As Paige Gutacker, alumni director for Summit Ministries, says, hospitality tells others, "Come on in and get a glimpse of what is real." This is the church in action: "The front door of the home is the side door of the church."<sup>66</sup>

<!-- page-447 -->

Hospitality is so important that the apostle Paul listed it as one of the required characteristics for church leaders (1 Tim. 3:2–7).<sup>67</sup>

Hospitality means creating an environment where people can go beneath the surface, where—without fear of abandonment—they feel free to share what is really going on. Gutacker puts it this way: "The hospitable reception of a guest is more than just the opening of one's door to another. It is also—and perhaps more fundamentally—about opening one's self to another. The type of hospitality that truly matters is one that is about the creation of a space, a free space within and around the host."<sup>68</sup>

Although being in groups of people is something that comes naturally to humans, true, hospitable community takes practice because to participate we must take off our masks and put others first.

Community is based on friendship, but there is a vital, deeper level as well. It's called accountability.

### *Accountability*

Ted Haggard was the pastor of a large, successful church that started with a Bible study in his basement but grew to include many thousands of people. Haggard's position of leadership enabled him to speak to millions of people through books, television programs, speeches, and news appearances. All of this made Haggard one of the most influential evangelical leaders in America. Sadly, Haggard's entire life unraveled when a male prostitute came forward with credible claims that he had participated in homosexual sex with Haggard and sold him drugs.

Admitting to most of the allegations, Haggard wrote a wrenching letter to his congregation in which he said, "The public person I was wasn't a lie; it was just incomplete. When I stopped communicating about my problems, the darkness increased and finally dominated me. As a result, I did things that were contrary to everything I believe."<sup>69</sup> Haggard's story is not as rare as you might think. Seminary professor Bobby Clinton believes, based on his research, that 70 percent of Christian leaders do not finish well.<sup>70</sup> This should shake us to the core and call us to repentance.

If we hope for good accountability, we must prepare for frequent repentance. As Haggard attested, without others keeping us accountable, we're unlikely to be honest with ourselves or with God. The Chuck Colson says, "There is no limit to the human capacity for self-justification." We need others to call us to repentance through tearful altar calls. Those who feel emotionally touched respond, while those who are not emotionally touched do not. How we feel, however, should not determine whether we engage in regular repentance. As John Stonestreet says, "Classic Christianity is not to repent *when* you feel like it, but repent *so* you will feel like it."

Repentance involves soul-searching. Is there rebellion in your heart? Are you hiding from God's presence in any area of life? Have you acted toward your neighbor in a way that was ungodly?

In addition to taking time to talk to God in prayer about your hurts and sins, schedule time to meet with a mentor with whom you can share what you are going through. Meeting

<!-- page-448 -->

often with a spiritual director helps one heal more quickly and rest in the assurance that God *wants* us to be restored in our relationships with him.

### *Service*

Scripture describes the church as a body (Rom. 12; 1 Cor. 12), and just as each part plays a role in a body's survival and health, so each individual participates in the meaning of the church, building others up, which then returns energy to the individual, making him or her feel more alive.

And we, the body of Christ, must also apply all the gifts of God to every area of life. We must not separate what we bring to the body from how we exercise our gifting outside the body. Everyone's gifts—even those that are not usually deemed "spiritual"—have enormous value. Authors Ralph T. Mattson and Arthur F. Miller Jr. put it this way:

> The Body can get into trouble by failing to embrace the gifts of its members when the exercise of those gifts occurs mainly in the world. If I am a lawyer, a merchant, a dentist, a farmer, or a machinist with gifts appropriate to those vocations, the Body makes my life of work irrelevant to my life of faith unless it includes all of me when we are together.<sup>71</sup>

This does not mean we should demand a place based on what we think our gifts might be. "You do not announce your gift to the fellowship and create a place for yourself," say Mattson and Miller. "As opportunities arise, you demonstrate your gift and allow the fellowship to confirm your gift and to supply increased opportunities for its use."<sup>72</sup>

> **A big goal makes a group more disciplined. It is easier to say no to the merely good when there is something truly great to which to say yes. The power of yes—of yes said together—makes it easier to tackle bad habits, shake off laziness, and strengthen one's willpower.**

## 10. Conclusion

Overcoming doubt and disbelief calls for more than just intellectual solutions. We need other people. We need the kind of community that enables us to grow stronger and flourish.

The church, like a sports team with its heart set on the state championship, thrives in community. When one falls, others pick him up. When another flags in his enthusiasm, he is buoyed by the enthusiasm of the others. Because of its members' unifying goal, the team grows stronger, not weaker, through difficulty.

A big goal makes a group more disciplined. It is easier to say no to the merely good when there is something truly great to which to say yes. The power of yes—of yes said together—makes it easier to tackle bad habits, shake off laziness, and strengthen one's willpower.

> **Be one whose focus gives you something to say yes to, and see what God will do.**

Here's another example. For many years, my family and I lived in a home near the Tennessee River, a major

<!-- page-449 -->

route for barge traffic. We spent hours in our kayaks watching tugboats push massive barges of grain, coal, and other products down the river. Occasionally, we heard reports of barges coming loose from one another. Adrift from their guidance system, these barges posed a serious threat to other river traffic and to bridge supports.

When we come loose from our anchoring to God and our anchoring to the guidance and companionship of others, we lose our way and pose a danger to ourselves and others. I urge you, as an older brother in Christ, to find mentors. Become involved in Christian community, seek accountability, repent of sin, and be reconciled to God and others. Ask God to strengthen your vision and give you courage to live faithfully with your calling, great or small. Be one whose focus gives you something to say yes to, and see what God will do.

## Endnotes

<!-- page-449 -->

1. James W. Sire, *Why Good Arguments Often Fail: Making a More Persuasive Case for Christ* (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity, 2006), 48–49.
2. Paul Copan, *True for You, but Not for Me: Overcoming Objections to Christian Faith* (Minneapolis: Bethany, 1998), 18.
3. Scott McConnell, "LifeWay Research Finds Reasons 18- to 22-Year-Olds Drop Out of Church," August 7, 2007, www.lifeway.com/Article/LifeWay-Research-finds-reasons-18-to-22-year-olds-drop-out-of-church.
4. Dave Sterrett, *Why Trust Jesus* (Chicago: Moody, 2010), 23.
5. Frank Newport, "In U.S., 77% Identify as Christian," Gallup, http://www.gallup.com/poll/159548/identify-christian.aspx.
6. Quoted in Paul Froese and Christopher Bader, *America's Four Gods: What We Say about God and What That Says about Us* (New York: Oxford, 2010), 5.
7. "U.S. Religious Knowledge Survey," September 28, 2010, Pew Research Center's Forum on Religion and Public Life, www.pewforum.org/2010/09/28/u-s-religious-knowledge-survey/.
8. Os Guinness, *God in the Dark: The Assurance of Faith beyond a Shadow of Doubt* (Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 1996), 58–59.
9. John Frederick Coots and Haven Gillespie, "Santa Claus Is Coming to Town."
10. Coots and Gillespie, "Santa Claus Is Coming to Town."
11. Sigmund Freud, "The Future of an Illusion" in *The Freud Reader*, ed. Peter Gay (New York: Norton, 1989), 703–4.
12. Basil Mitchell, *How to Play Theological Politics: Essays in Faith and Reason* (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 1990), 32–33, quoted in Steven Garber, *Fabric of Faithfulness: Weaving Together Belief and Behavior* (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity, 2007), 102.
13. See Mark Mittelberg, "Faith Path: Helping Friends Find Their Way to Christ," Christian Research Journal 33, no. 3, 2010, www.equip.org/articles/faith-path/.
14. For example, Steven Pinker, "Less Faith, More Reason," *The Harvard Crimson*, October 27, 2006, www.thecrimson.com/article/2006/10/27/less-faith-more-reason-there-is/.
15. Sean McDowell and Jonathan Morrow, *Is God Just a Human Invention? And Seventeen Other Questions Raised by the New Atheists* (Grand Rapids, MI: Kregel, 2010), 267.
16. For more on this point, I recommend Abdu Murray, *Grand Central Question: Answering the Critical Concerns of the Major Worldviews* (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity, 2013).
17. Richard Lewontin, "Billions and Billions of Demons," *The New York Review*, January 9, 1997, 31 (emphasis in the original).
18. Thomas Nagel, *The Last Word* (New York: Oxford University Press, 1997), 130.
19. Statistically speaking, your chances of running into a professor who believes in God are two in three. But only half of professors who believe in God express any kind of Christian belief. And among professors who claim to be Protestant or Catholic, the chance that the person will be religiously conservative—that he or she will actually believe the bible is true, for example—is about one in twenty. In other words, only two out of every hundred professors is likely to be an evangelical Christian who embraces traditional moral beliefs, whereas twenty-six out of every hundred are Committed Secularists, atheists, or agnostics. See Neil Gross and Solon Simmons, "The Religiosity of American College and University Professors," *Sociology of Religion* 70, no. 2 (2009): 114–18.
20. Upton Sinclair's actual quotation is "It is difficult to get a man to understand something, when his salary depends upon his not understanding it!" *I, Candidate for Governor: And How I Got Licked* (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1935), 109.
21. www.pewforum.org/Unaffiliated/nones-on-the-rise.aspx.
22. Craig M. Gay, *The Way of the Modern World: Or, Why It Is Tempting to Live As If God Does Not Exist* (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 1998), 239.

<!-- page-450 -->

23. Charles H. Kraft explains this temptation thoroughly in his book *Christianity with Power: Your Worldview and Your Experience of the Supernatural* (Eugene, OR: Wipf and Stock, 1989), 18–19.
24. Kraft, *Christianity with Power*, 18–19.
25. C. S. Lewis, *The Weight of Glory: And Other Essays*, originally published in 1949 (New York: HarperCollins, 2001), 26. C.S. Lewis is often referred to as *reductionism*.
26. Robbie Low, "The Truth about Men and the Church," *Touchstone*, June 2003, www.touchstonemag.com/archives/article.php?id=16-05-024-v.
27. Low, "The Truth about Men and the Church."
28. Garber, *Fabric of Faithfulness*, 149.
29. [No text for 29 visible.]
30. See Froese and Bader, *America's Four Gods*, 90–91, 104. Froese and Bader, Baylor University sociologists, found there are four common views of God and that peoples' views of God affect everything else in their lives. For example, political conservatives are more likely to believe in an authoritative God, whereas liberals are more likely to believe in a distant God (60). Those who believe in an authoritative or benevolent God are more likely to say that adultery, gay marriage, and abortion are always wrong, whereas those who believe in a distant God are more likely to say such activities are not wrong at all (66). People who believe that God is authoritative or benevolent are less likely to believe that science can solve human problems and less likely to see humans as evolved from primates but also more likely to view science as revealing God's glory (90–91, 104).
31. Aldous Huxley, *Ends and Means: An Inquiry into the Nature of Ideals* (London: Chatt & Windus, 1946), 310.
32. Larry J. Nelson, Laura M. Padilla-Walker, and Jason S. Carroll, "I Believe It Is Wrong But I Still Do It: A Comparison of Religious Young Men Who Do Versus Do Not Use Pornography," *Psychology of Religion and Spirituality* 2, no. 3 (August 2010): 137–47.
33. The other condition was drug use. Jeremy E. Uecker, Mark D. Regnerus, and Margaret L. Vaaler, "Losing My Religion: The Social Sources of Religious Decline in Early Adulthood," *Social Forces* 85, no. 4, June 2007, 1667–92.
34. John MacArthur, "God's Word on Homosexuality: The Truth about Sin and the Reality of Forgiveness," *The Master's Seminary Journal* 19, no. 2 (Fall 2008), 154.
35. Romans 13:8–10: "Owe no one anything, except to love each other, for the one who loves another has fulfilled the law. The commandments, 'You shall not commit adultery, You shall not murder, You shall not steal, You shall not covet'; and any other commandment, are summed up in this word: 'You shall love your neighbor as yourself.' Love does no wrong to a neighbor; therefore love is the fulfilling of the law"; Galatians 5:14: "The whole law is fulfilled in one word: 'You shall love your neighbor as yourself.'"
36. Ephesians 4:32: "Be kind to one another, tenderhearted, forgiving one another, as God in Christ forgave you."
37. MacArthur, "God's Word on Homosexuality," 154.
38. MacArthur, "God's Word on Homosexuality," 154–55.
39. Caitlin Johnson, "Cutting through Advertising Clutter," *CBS News Sunday Morning*, September 17, 2006, www.cbsnews.com/8301-3445_162-2015684.html.
40. Judith Grey, "Inside the Orwellian World of Ad-Funded Face-Recognition Technology," *Business Insider*, May 21, 2013, www.businessinsider.com/advertisers-using-facial-recognition-technology-2013-5.
41. John Stonestreet, talk given at Teach for Eternity, Orlando, Florida, October 13, 2013.
42. Maggie Jackson, *Distracted: The Erosion of Attention and the Coming Dark Age* (Amherst, NY: Prometheus, 2008), 14.
43. Newberg's research covers both chanting-type meditation and intercessory prayer. You can find more information at his website, http://www.andrewnewberg.com/research/.
44. David Caplan, "Language and the Brain" in *Handbook of Psycholinguistics*, ed. Morton Ann Gernsbacher (San Diego: Academic Press, 1994), 1023–53.
45. Leonard Sax, *The Five Factors Driving the Growing Epidemic of Unmotivated Boys and Underachieving Young Men* (New York: Basic Books, 2007), 91.
46. When I say doubt is normal, I mean to say that lots of people doubt what they believe. Even atheists experience doubt. Louis Menand tells a moving story of Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr., who ultimately became a respected justice of the US Supreme Court. As a young man, Holmes fought in the Civil War and was injured nearly to the point of death. At that point, Holmes began entertaining serious doubts and wondered whether he should recant his atheism. Ultimately, he decided not to but, with great irony, drifted off to sleep with a prayer: "God forgive me if I'm wrong." Louis Menand, *The Metaphysical Club: A Story of Ideas in America* (New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 2001), 38.
47. Ben Williams, "Dealing with Doubt," Summit Ministries Lecture Series.
48. 2 Corinthians 10:3–5: "Though we walk in the flesh, we are not waging war according to the flesh. For the weapons of our warfare are not of the flesh but have divine power to destroy strongholds. We destroy arguments and every lofty opinion raised against the knowledge of God, and take every thought captive to obey Christ."
49. Os Guinness, *God in the Dark: The Chronicles of Narnia, Book 3: The Horse and His Boy* (New York: HarperTrophy, 1954), 216.
50. C. S. Lewis, *The Chronicles of Narnia, Book 3: The Horse and His Boy* (New York: HarperTrophy, 1954), 216.
51. Garber, *Fabric of Faithfulness*, 100.
52. John Stonestreet paraphrases Dorothy Sayers on this point, asking, "Why would anyone want a worldview that applies to only 10% of life?" See Stonestreet, "Worldview at Work: Running Companies More Truly," Breakpoint Commentaries, May 2, 2013, www.breakpoint.org/bpcommentaries/entry/13/22119.
53. Garber, *Fabric of Faithfulness*, 159.
54. Peter L. Berger and Thomas Luckmann, *The Social Construction of Reality: A Treatise in the Sociology of Knowledge* (New York: Doubleday, 1966), 163.
55. See Commission on Children at Risk, *Hardwired to Connect: The New Scientific Case for Authoritative Communities* (New York: Broadway Publications, 2003), 8. This crucial report was produced jointly by the YMCA of the USA, the Commission on Children at Risk, Dartmouth Medical School, and the Institute for American Values. The report's website provides ten characteristics of an authoritative community as one that is "warm and nurturing," "multi-generational," and inclined "toward the principle of love of neighbor" along with seven other criteria. Although it is possible for business and civic organizations to fulfill this function, by design they can almost never fulfill all ten. Churches, by definition, almost always do (obviously some churches do better than others). For all ten of the criteria, see www.caae.org/blog/resources/papers-publications/project-summary-hardwired-connect-new-scientific-case-authoritative-communities/.
56. Quoted in McDowell and Morrow, *Is God Just a Human Invention?*, 166–67.
57. See Monika Ardelt, "Effects of Religion and Purpose in Life on Elders' Subjective Well Being," *Journal of Religious Gerontology* 14, no. 4 (2003). Ardelt reports that activities that increase a person's sense of well-being may have a profound effect of mortality among older persons. When it comes to the power of mentoring, there are many studies demonstrating these effects. See, for example, Andrew J. Martin and Martin Dowson, "Interpersonal Relationships, Motivation, Engagement, and Achievement: Yields for Theory, Current Issues and Educational Practice," *Review of Educational Research* 79, no. 1 (2009): 344; Kathryn R. Wentzel, "Social-Motivational Processes and Interpersonal Relationships: Implications for Understanding Motivation at School," *Journal of Educational Psychology* 91, no. 1 (1999), 76–97; Andrew J. Martin, Herbert W. Marsh, Dennis M. McInerney, Jasmine Green, and Martin Dowson, "Getting Along with Teachers and Parents: The Yields of Good Relationships for Students' Achievement Motivation and Self-Esteem," *Australian Journal of Guidance and Counseling* 17, no. 2 (2007): 109–25; and Barbara Freeks and Christa Wertheim, "Learning by Mentoring: Prospective Teachers as Mentors to Children at Risk," *Mentoring and Tutoring* 14, no. 2 (2006): 149–61. Keith A. King, Rebecca A. Vidourek, Beth Davis, and Warren McClellan, "Increasing Self-Esteem and School Connectedness through a Multidimensional Mentoring Program," *Journal of School Health* 72, no. 7 (2002): 294–99; Rachel C. Vreeman and Aaron E. Carroll, "A Systematic Review of School-Based Interventions to Prevent Bullying," *Archives of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine* 161, no. 1 (2007): 86.
58. This is one of many conclusions reached by Jason Lanker, "The Relationship between Mid-Adolescent Natural Mentoring Relationships and the Christian Spirituality of North American First-Year Christian College Students" (Unpublished dissertation, Talbot School of Theology, Biola University, May 2009), 141, 147.
59. Barna Group has found that among young adults who stayed faithful to church, as opposed to those who left, those who stayed were significantly more likely to have an older adult in the church who cared for them personally and to have that care extend even to helping them in their vocation and education. See "5 Reasons Millennials Stay Connected to Church," www.barna.org/barna-update/millennials/635-5-reasons-millennials-stay-connected-to-church.
60. The study is called the "Framingham Heart Study" (after the name of the town in Massachusetts whose residents have been studied). It has been carried on by generations of academics since 1948. Its main focus has been to examine the causes of cardiovascular disease. For more information, see www.framinghamheartstudy.org.
61. Matt Redman, *The Unquenchable Worshipper: Coming Back to the Heart of Worship* (Ventura, CA: Regal, 2001), 18.
62. Researcher Sigal Barsade found that whether our spirit is positive or negative affects those around us without our ever saying a word. See "The Ripple Effect: Emotional Contagion and Its Influence on Group Behavior," *Administrative Science Quarterly* 40, no. 4 (December 2002): 644–75.
63. Alexander Schmemann, *For the Life of the World: Sacraments and Orthodoxy* (Crestwood, NY: St. Vladimir's Seminary Press, 1973), 26.
64. Humphrey Carpenter, *The Inklings: C. S. Lewis, J. R. R. Tolkien, Charles Williams and Their Friends* (London: HarperCollins, 1978), 22.
65. Carpenter, *The Inklings*, 32.
66. An unnamed Los Angeles pastor quoted in Christine D. Pohl, *Making Room: Recovering Hospitality as a Christian Tradition* (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 1999), 57.
67. 1 Timothy 3:2–7: "An overseer must be above reproach, the husband of one wife, sober-minded, self-controlled, respectable, hospitable, able to teach, not a drunkard, not violent but gentle, not quarrelsome, not a lover of money. He must manage his own household well, with all dignity keeping his children submissive, for if someone does not know how to manage his own household, how will he care for God's church? He must not be a recent convert, or he may become puffed up with conceit and fall into the condemnation of the devil. Moreover, he must be well thought of by outsiders, so that he may not fall into disgrace, into a snare of the devil."
68. Paige Lewis Gutacker, "Welcome Home: The Art and Practice of Hospitality," unpublished paper.

<!-- page-451 -->

69. "Ted Haggard: I Am a Deceiver and a Liar," Beliefnet, November 5, 2006, www.beliefnet.com/News/2006/11/Ted-Haggard-I-Am-A-Deceiver-And-A-Liar.aspx#ted.
70. Referenced in Bill Thrall, Bruce McNicol, and Ken McElrath, *Ascent of a Leader: How Ordinary Relationships Develop Extraordinary Character and Influence* (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1999), 14.
71. Ralph Mattson and Arthur F. Miller Jr., *Finding a Job You Can Love* (Phillipsburg, NJ: Presbyterian and Reformed, 1982), 172.
72. Mattson and Miller, *Finding a Job You Can Love*, 36–37.
