<!-- page-455 -->

# Conclusion

## 1. Look Here for Life's Directions

Wow. We've covered a lot of ground since you parachuted into New York City's Central Park. Remember the story? You were told by a mysterious stranger about a five-thousand-dollar diamond necklace, yours free, provided that you claimed it within twenty minutes at Tiffany & Co. And to win the prize, you needed to know where you were, where you were going, and the best route to take.

Life offers few free diamond necklaces but lots of opportunities to pursue fulfilling lives. If we embrace false beliefs about life and the world, though, we'll find ourselves lost. We need help from the One who can see the end from the beginning and who knows the path we ought to take.

<!-- page-456 -->

In this book, we've examined the Bible's claim that the good life is a God life. Along the way, we've encountered many big questions: Is God even real? What is he like? Is the Bible a trustworthy source? And what about biblical teachings that seem to counter the Bible's claim that God is good? We shouldn't settle for hit-or-miss answers. The last thing we need is a shallow worldview that can't provide solid guidance on life's most important questions.

*Understanding the Faith* was written to explore the foundation of a biblical worldview: how the Bible reveals the truth about God, humanity, and life in this world. As our odyssey comes to a close, let's review where we've been and end on a clear note about how to live our lives differently.

## 2. According to the Bible, We Can Know the Way to Live

Every day we make thousands of decisions, big and small. Our biggest decisions have to do with such things as how to nurture lifelong relationships. Our smaller ones include such things as what kind of vegetables to have with dinner. Even if we do succeed in making the small decisions well, no one five years from now will remember or care. But the decisions we make about whom to be friends with, what to study in college, where to live, and what kind of community to be involved with have consequences that will affect us all our days. Good decisions create synergy with other good decisions, but bad decisions add up too. Just as a boulder rolling down a hillside can trigger an avalanche, bad decisions can cascade into unthinkable consequences.

Given the weight of our decisions, some people would rather avoid deciding anything important. They may even tout the virtues of opting out of the rat race. After all, as actress Lily Tomlin says, "The problem with the rat race is that even if you win, you're still a rat." If the biblical account is true, we are far more than rodents running on life's treadmill. Our lives on this planet, including difficult decisions and trying circumstances, are part of an everlasting journey of bearing the image of the Creator of the universe.

Here's the rub: when it comes to discovering the purpose for life, the clock is ticking. Every worldview offers ideas of how to make the most of our limited time on earth. Each offers ideas that grapple with ultimate questions, such as where we came from (origin), who we are (identity), what is real (meaning), what the good life is (morality), and where are we going for now and for eternity (destiny). Some people think very little about these questions. Others gravitate toward complex and mysterious answers. Either way, our responses form patterns that shape how we live, for better or for worse.

> **Our lives on this planet, including difficult decisions and trying circumstances, are part of an everlasting journey of bearing the image of the creator of the universe.**

The Bible does not promote escapist answers to life's ultimate questions; rather, it upholds as positive examples those who understand the times and know what to do (1 Chron. 12:32).<sup>1</sup> There is a good way and a bad way to live, a way of wisdom and a way of foolishness, a way of life and a way of death. The Scriptures are clear that *we can and should know the difference* (Isa. 30:21).<sup>2</sup> We can choose life (Deut. 30:19).<sup>3</sup> We can be set free by truth (John 8:32).<sup>4</sup>

Yet the Bible is also clear that walking in the right way is impossible without divine guidance. Twisted in our thinking by original sin and apt to embrace inadequate or wrong answers to life's ultimate questions, we find ourselves loving the wrong things in the wrong way. To paraphrase Augustine, disordered loves lead to lives of disorder. Fortunately, the Bible's story doesn't end in our futility. It offers hope: salvation through the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ, who is the only way.

Complicating our own internal struggle is the common belief that there are no answers "out there" in the world. We often hear from various sources in our culture that thoughts about spiritual things are private, subjective, and relative, not public, objective, and universal.<sup>5</sup> This sacred/secular split makes the search for spiritual truth seem pointless. As a result, says Christian philosopher J. P. Moreland, "The life of the mind is thus separated, broken off, and compartmentalized as a function of the 'secular' life instead of more naturally being integrated with the spiritual."<sup>6</sup>

But in this volume, we've seen that this sacred/secular split is a false notion. Christianity is a deep knowledge tradition that says the Bible reveals who God is as well as the truth about humanity and reality. The Bible does not call for blind faith; rather, it provides reliable assurance that God is worthy of our belief. But does the Bible actually have the authority to reveal God, as it claims?

> **The Bible does not call for blind faith; rather, it provides reliable assurance that God is worthy of our belief.**

<!-- page-457 -->

## 3. Where the Bible's Authority Comes From

It is one thing to see that Christianity is true and yet another to recognize the authority the Bible claims over our lives. We looked at two kinds of authority in this book, *soft* and *hard*. The Bible's authority is both *soft* authority, promising peace with God and flourishing on earth through a relationship with Christ, and *hard* authority, with Jesus being presented as "King of kings and Lord of lords" (Rev. 19:16)<sup>7</sup> who will someday render judgment.

The Bible is God's story. It's both by God and about God. It reveals who he is and what he has done, is doing, and will do in the world and for all eternity. Even more, the Bible is *from* God and *for* humans. So, it's our story too. It is a compass, directing what takes place in the world as it daily turns and makes its way around the sun. The Bible's message is that God in his justice stands firmly against evil but in his grace desires all to come to repentance (2 Pet. 3:9).<sup>8</sup>

More than two billion people on the planet embrace the Bible's message, at least nominally, they claim the moniker "Christian." Not surprisingly, then, the Bible is the world's bestselling book. It has been enormously influential in the United States, where, as French sociologist Alexis de Tocqueville wrote in the 1830s, belief in the Bible had made it "both the most enlightened and the freest" of nations.<sup>9</sup> The Bible's place in world literature is also unrivaled. Even atheist Richard Dawkins once said that a person who has not read the Bible, the King James Version at least, is "verging on the barbarian."<sup>10</sup> The Bible is important. But its importance is not where its authority comes from.

The Bible promises blessing, insight, freedom from spiritual bondage, direction in life, and the ability to grasp truth and defeat error. The Bible is remarkably coherent for a book containing sixty-six separate books of history, poetry, prophesy, gospels, and letters penned

<!-- page-458 -->

by about forty authors over a time span of approximately fifteen hundred years. But the Bible's authority does not come from its promises or coherence, either.

So *on what basis* do we say the Bible has authority? It is on the basis of **revelation** that the Bible makes known something that was previously unknown.<sup>11</sup> Revelation is God's way of making the infinite finite, the unknowable knowable, and the complex plain.

> **If the Bible is a compass for life, Jesus Christ is true north.**

Certainly, there are things that can be known about God without the Bible, such as his virtues as the Creator. As Psalm 19:1 says, "The heavens declare the glory of God, and the sky above proclaims his handiwork." However, what we humans need to know about salvation, God's nature as Trinity, the unfolding of God's plan through the nation of Israel, and Jesus's death and resurrection could not be known without Scripture.

If the Bible is a compass for life, Jesus Christ is true north. Jesus claimed to be the "I am" of the Old Testament. He said that he and God were "one" **essence** and told his followers that those who had seen him had seen God.<sup>12</sup> The gospel writers were clear about what Jesus was claiming, and they seemed certain—and became more certain after Jesus's resurrection—that he was telling the truth.

> **Jesus considered all of Scripture to be authoritative.**

Jesus considered all of Scripture to be authoritative. In referring to the Old Testament, Jesus consistently said, "As it *is* written," implying that he believed the Scriptures not to be something from the past but to be the present and eternal truth of God. Jesus treated Scripture as final in authority and leaned on the Old Testament in his personal spiritual anguish.<sup>13</sup>

Jesus also conferred authority on his disciples and indicated that this authority extended far beyond the time boundaries of his own earthly ministry. On the night before going to the cross, Jesus prayed, "I do not ask for these only, but also for those who believe in me through *their* word" (John 17:20). In what we now call the Great Commission, Jesus claimed all authority in heaven and on earth and commissioned the disciples to spread his teachings to the whole world (Matt. 28:18–20).<sup>14</sup>

To summarize, the Old Testament Scripture is considered by Jesus to accurately portray God and tell the truth about reality. In his own ministry, Jesus claimed the authority of God, and he imparted that authority to those who would spread his message. The whole of Scripture, then, tells a single story, with Jesus at the center and its words conducted by the Holy Spirit, who "breathed out" what God wanted said (2 Tim. 3:16).<sup>15</sup> As professor Gordon R. Lewis explains, "The Holy Spirit supernaturally motivated and superintended the prophetic and apostolic recipients of revelation in the entire process of writing their scriptural books."<sup>16</sup> To paraphrase theologian Carl F. H. Henry, the Bible is a collection of writings through which God directed the authors to communicate exactly what he wanted, without overriding their personalities.

Jesus's claims of authority, as well as his recognition of the Old Testament's authority and his giving of authority to the apostles, constitute *internal* evidence for the Bible's authority. But external evidence also reinforces that authority.

<!-- page-459 -->

## 4. Can We Know the Bible's Claims to Be True?

Is there evidence *outside* the Bible that shows it to be true? By "true," we mean that which corresponds to reality (i.e., the **correspondence theory of truth**).<sup>17</sup> The biblical account is that God created us to be knowers and gave us language to facilitate communication between himself and us and with one another. To *know* things is not just to conduct experiments about them. **Knowledge** is what philosophers call "justified true belief." Yes, people have their biases, but this does not mean that truth cannot be known. By this criterion, there are two kinds of external evidence showing the Bible to be reliable. The first is the accuracy with which it was transmitted through time, and the second is its accuracy in describing historical times and places that can be verified, as well as factual events occurring in those times and places.<sup>18</sup>

> Knowledge is what philosophers call "justified true belief."

> Many of the places and events of the Bible have been verified through historical and archaeological methods.

In criticism of the Bible's reliability, some cite **textual variants**, including spelling and unclear readings, word order changes, and obvious errors. Yet of the four hundred thousand variants scholars have found, fewer than four thousand have any real significance at all for the meaning of a verse, and none of these affects core doctrines. What we have today, in the New Testament at least, is a text that reproduces with 99 percent accuracy what was written nearly two millennia ago. Not only has the Bible been accurately transmitted through time but many of the places and events of the Bible have been verified through historical and archaeological methods, providing the kind of converging evidence one would expect a divinely authoritative book to possess.

> Humans are capable of writing the truth, and the documents claiming God's existence are historically reliable.

Of course, there are many who do not think the Bible is trustworthy. *The Bible was written by men*, they object. This is obviously true. Christians have never claimed that the Bible descended from heaven in its complete form. But as we saw throughout the text of this volume, humans are capable of writing the truth, and the documents claiming God's existence are historically reliable. So saying the Bible is false just because it was written down by human beings is not a sufficient reason to reject its claims.

A second objection is that the Bible has been corrupted through time and is therefore untrustworthy. As is the case with all ancient documents, no original manuscripts of the Old and the New Testaments are known to exist. Scholars have worked to reconstruct accurate versions of these original texts, and they have plenty of source material with which to work: more than ten thousand Old Testament manuscripts from all over the world, and through fifty-seven hundred Greek New Testament manuscripts of various passages, more than the ages more than twenty thousand versions and more than one million quotations of the text by ancient writers.<sup>19</sup> The abundance of evidence gives us reason to believe that the Bible we have today is substantially faithful to what was originally written.

<!-- page-460 -->

A third objection to the Bible's trustworthiness is that it leaves out a number of Scripture-like books, the so-called **Lost Gospels**. Though the Lost Gospels may be historically interesting, they far from meet the careful criteria used by church fathers to decide which books should be included in the **canon**, the body of Scripture considered authoritative.

> *Lost Gospels:* a collection of fifty-two gnostic texts discovered in 1945 in Nag Hammadi, Egypt, and written sometime between the second and fourth centuries AD.

> *Canon:* from the Greek word for "standard"; the collection of biblical writings commonly accepted as genuine and authoritative.

If the Bible has both internal and external validity, and if it has been accurately transmitted through time, it is reasonable to take its claims of authority seriously. If the Bible is indeed from God to us, nothing escapes its scope. Cultures, governments, life, death, family, and entertainment are all to be understood in the light of what the Bible reveals of God and his authority. So what does the Bible's authoritative revelation say about who God is?

## 5. What the Bible Says about God

More than eight out of every ten people in the United States believe in God, but how they define God differs.<sup>20</sup> Some view him as a judgmental authority figure; others view him as a good and kind guide in life; others see God as distant and critical; and still others view him as more of a cosmic force who isn't really a person at all.<sup>21</sup> How people understand God seems to have an effect on many other areas of their lives, including how they raise their families and their views on the social and political issues of our day.

Can God's nature and character be known beyond mere opinion? The Bible assumes yes. Although the biblical revelation of God shows that he is bigger than our ability to comprehend, the question for Christians is not whether we can know him *completely* but whether we can know him *truly* through what Scripture says. Further, Scripture itself encourages us to know God. We are to bask in, and enjoy his glory.<sup>22</sup> And the best way of knowing God, according to Hebrews 1:1–2,<sup>23</sup> is to know Jesus. Through the death and resurrection of Jesus, we can truly come to know God.

So who does God reveal himself to be? The names used to describe God in Hebrew, the language of God's covenant people, are **Elohim**, which focuses on God as the creator of the whole world, and **Yahweh**, or "the Lord," the personal and covenantal name of God, embodying how he redeemed his people and brought them into relationship with himself. The Bible says God is holy, eternal, **omniscient**, **omnipotent**, **omnipresent**, unchanging, wise, righteous, loving, and mercifully gracious.<sup>24</sup>

> *Elohim:* from the Hebrew for "deity"; the generic name used in the Old Testament for the creator-God.

> *Yahweh:* from the Hebrew for "I Am"; the personal and covenantal name of God used in the Old Testament.

<!-- page-461 -->

Scripture also shows God to be three persons in one—a Trinity of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit—one divine being with three equal, distinct centers of consciousness in a personal, indwelling relationship.<sup>25</sup> Scripture does not use the word *Trinity*, but it does clearly communicate that God is one essence, the Father is God, Jesus is God, and the Holy Spirit is God. It also contains several passages that refer to the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit together.<sup>26</sup>

The **doctrine of the Trinity** distinguishes biblical Christianity from other theistic religions. Knowing that God is both eternally personal and in relationship transforms our understanding of what it means to be persons in relationship. The relationship among the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit shows us how to be in relationship with God. Unity with one another also becomes possible; we understand what harmony in relationships looks like because of the Trinity.

> The doctrine of the Trinity distinguishes biblical Christianity from other theistic religions.

God's attributes are unified in his nature. God doesn't *become* these things by doing them, nor does any aspect of his character take second place to any other aspect. His justice and mercy, for example, are not in conflict. This is an important realization as we look at the Bible's metanarrative: its story of history, life, and the world to come.

## 6. The Bible as a Metanarrative

All good stories have a theme, a tension arising and being resolved, and diversity within unity. The Bible is such a story. All of its little stories combine into one big story that moves from the creation to the end of time and even hints at what life is like *beyond* time. The Bible claims to be the true story that makes sense of all other stories. This is what we mean when we say the Bible is a **metanarrative**. It is the narrative of narratives. A metanarrative is not true just because people fervently believe in it. Some metanarratives are made-up stories; others describe events that actually took place.

> A metanarrative is not true just because people fervently believe in it.

The sheer coherence of the Bible's metanarrative adds to its credibility, demonstrating how unlikely it is that it was manufactured for someone's selfish purposes. Seeing Scripture as a metanarrative also blunts the impact of our self-interested reading of the Bible, clearing up the confusion that often comes from relying on selective verses or personal hunches about what a given passage means. It also helps resolve some things in the Bible we find confusing, such as God being, at the exact same time and without conflict, both a God of justice and a God of love. God's love threads through the entire story of the Bible, even in times when his people experienced the just consequences of their defiance of God's commands.

In chapters 5 and 6, we examined the Bible's metanarrative in six acts.

**Act 1: Creation.** The Bible celebrates God's creation of the heavens most notably in Genesis chapters 1 and 2. These accounts of creation offer the big picture and the close-up and are alternately formal and informal, dignified and earthy, general and specific, big-picture and personal. Creation showcases God's glory, explains how he establishes order, confronts the

<!-- page-462 -->

pagan creation myths, establishes humans as the climax of creation, explains humanity's purpose, and clears up confusing issues such as the purpose and place of sexuality.

**Act 2: Fall.** God originally creates human beings in a state of *shalom*: peace, prosperity, goodness, and order. In defying God, Adam and Eve displace *shalom* with unbelief, irresponsibility, and rebellion. Sin says, "God, I don't think your plan is as good as you say it is." It results in ever-increasing arrogance, abuse, and death. In Genesis, sin multiplies to the point where people crave evil (Gen. 6:5).<sup>27</sup> Each person did—and continues to do—what was right in his own eyes (Judg. 17:6).<sup>28</sup> We are not sinners because we sin; we sin because we are sinners.

> **In defying God, Adam and Eve displace shalom with unbelief, irresponsibility, and rebellion.**

**Act 3: Redemption Initiated.** The nation of Israel is sent on a mission from God. The Old Testament of the Bible tells this part of the story in three stages: God initiates redemption, Israel fails, and God continues his work of redemption even in the midst of that failure. Although many people look at the Old Testament and see only God's judgment, a closer look reveals that God's grace is the subtle subtext of the curse on Adam and Eve, promising that their seed would ultimately triumph over Satan's work. In this situation, as in many others, God interacts with his people through covenants. The word **covenant** refers to an agreement secured by God in which he expressed his will based on a larger vision of life rather than merely giving a list of instructions. God makes covenants with Adam and Eve in creation, with Noah and his descendants, with Abraham and his descendants, with Moses and the nation of Israel, with David and his descendants, and finally with Israel that promised to restore *shalom*.

> **God interacts with his people through covenants.**

**Act 4: Redemption Accomplished.** The prophets of the Old Testament envisioned a messiah who would drive out death and humiliation. Yet, after God's initiation of the new covenant with Israel, a four-hundred-year silence follows. Punctuating this silence is the good news of God's gospel through Jesus Christ, the God-man who fulfills the Abrahamic and Davidic covenants and establishes a kingly dynasty to fulfill prophecy, save his people, and establish his kingdom. Much to the surprise of the nation of Israel, though, the kingdom established by Jesus Christ is not a *place* but a *reality*: God is king. It is not a military triumph but a victory over everything that plagues us: sin, sickness, death, and unfaithfulness. And it is for us—all of us—because as we saw in chapter 6, Jesus Christ extends the new covenant to all people, both Jews and non-Jews (Gentiles).

**Act 5: Redemption Applied.** Through Jesus's ministry, the New Testament announces that God's kingdom is at hand (Matt. 4:17)<sup>29</sup> and that it will bring blessing to the nations of the earth (Gal. 3:6–9).<sup>30</sup> The vehicle by which this good news is carried to the world is the church, the *ecclesia*, a community united by God's Spirit and charged with proclaiming Christ's kingdom. The early church was very diverse: Jews and non-Jews, men and women, slaves and free people. Drawing from Old Testament imagery, the church is described as a bride, an army, a nation, a body, a family, a team, a temple, a flock, and a hospital.

<!-- page-463 -->

**Act 6: Redemption Completed.** To those who think that all the good stuff is "up there" in heaven, Act 6 of God's story comes as quite a surprise. It does not culminate with an emptying out of the earth; rather, at the end of all things, the book of Revelation explains, God comes to "tabernacle" among us in a new heaven and new earth. The experience of his presence will be even better than creation because a world that was fallen and redeemed is a greater testament to God's glory than creation itself. The parallels between the creation account in Genesis 1–3 and the end of all things in Revelation 20–22 demonstrate that the entirety of Scripture is one story: a story of Christ renewing all things and reversing sin, suffering, and brokenness.

Taken together, these six acts show God as wisely and patiently instructing, chastening, delivering, and restoring his people. He is faithful when they are not and continually woos them, providing a strong counterpoint to the common impression that God is brooding, grumpy, mean, and distant. Actually, all through the pages of Scripture, we see a God of grace, whose story is the whole story—the true story of the world and everyone in it. And it calls forth two very specific responses: loving God and loving our neighbors.

## 7. The Role Humans Play in the Bible's Metanarrative

When asked about the greatest commandment, Jesus said, "You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your mind. This is the great and first commandment. And a second is like it: You shall love your neighbor as yourself. On these two commandments depend all the Law and the Prophets" (Matt. 22:37–40).

In other words, with every aspect of our beings, we are to pledge allegiance to God, the one whose image we bear. In the ancient Near Eastern culture in which the Bible was written, kings set up images of themselves in conquered cities to remind people who was in charge. When God decided to set up his image, he formed living, breathing humans who would represent him with purpose, trust, confidence, decisiveness, creativity, and responsibility.

We bear God's image in our function as rulers on the earth. The **doctrine of the fall** describes how our first parents tried to slough off their image-bearing capacity but found underneath only nakedness and shame. Irresponsibility, paranoia, and blame replaced responsibility, trust, and purpose. By trying to take matters into their own hands, Adam and Eve transmuted pleasure into pain and fruitfulness into barrenness. They experienced what it was like to be cast out of God's presence.

> *Doctrine of the Fall:* the orthodox Christian belief that sin entered the natural world when Adam and Eve chose to disobey God and ate from the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil.

The Bible's word for this rebellion is *sin*. Sin is a parasite that survives by living off its human hosts. Like rust, sin eats away at us, corroding our image-bearing capacity even as we crown ourselves kings and queens of our stolen domain. Ultimately, we become like what we worship: mute and

<!-- page-464 -->

lifeless yet cruel and insatiably demanding. The theological term for what happened is *original sin*, the biblical doctrine that we are thoroughly and absolutely fallen.

The antidote to sin is God's glory. His glory reveals our hidden idols and scours away our illusions. The white-hot hum of God's glory ignites within us a burning determination to declare war against *anything* standing in the way of fully bearing the image of the always-good, always-merciful, and always-faithful God. This restoration occurs through **repentance**, the biblical word for "changing one's mind."

> **Restoration occurs through repentance, the biblical word for "changing one's mind."**

It is like waking up to a new world, to a realization that we have accepted counterfeits, and finding new joy in discovering a way of life far superior.

In this climate of repentance, we can see that sins such as wrath, greed, sloth, pride, lust, envy, and gluttony are parasites that attack something good. The good path is finally open to us, and through the Holy Spirit, we can see beyond sin's obstacles to a life of wisdom and flourishing. We can learn to love the right things at the right time and avoid the path of foolishness. In the end, the gospel of God is not merely a plan by which to avoid hell but also a way to live differently now.

The life of repentance changes the way we love our neighbors from just *getting along* with the people around us to actively seeking their genuine good. Whereas sin breaks relationships with God, one another, ourselves, and even creation, redemption transforms our relationships, enabling us to seek *shalom* for those around us so we may find *shalom* for ourselves (Jer. 29:7).<sup>31</sup>

If the Bible has authority, if it clearly reveals who God is and what he is doing in the world, being able to read and understand it becomes one of the most important things we can do. Yet most people don't know how to read the Bible well. They're easily distracted by the search for things that speak to them personally. They're sometimes bogged down in details. With a little help, they can learn to see God's nature and character more clearly in a life-changing fashion.

## 8. How to Read the Bible

Though we want to know God personally, we often filter our reading of Scripture through our own desires and cultural understandings, as though our personal search for meaning is what makes Scripture meaningful. But as we have seen, the Bible is about God, not us. It does Scripture itself calls us to be "transformed by the renewal of [our] mind[s]" because by doing that, we may "discern what is the will of God, what is good and acceptable and perfect" (Rom. 12:2). For anyone struggling with a sense of direction in life, that is very good news.

Often believers miss the fullness of this blessing by making several common reading mistakes such as assuming that the Bible doesn't need to be interpreted, misapplying the text, selectively applying the Bible's teaching to certain agendas, treating the Bible as mainly a collection of "life lessons," getting bored with not always discovering new truths, taking the Bible out of context, and trying to make the Bible fit contemporary moral standards and

<!-- page-465 -->

politically correct notions.

These mistakes may be remedied by interpreting biblical texts more faithfully. Reading the Bible well involves selecting a good study Bible and committing to seriously getting into the text. Read chapters, not just verses. As you read Scripture, seek to understand the genre (poetry, history, proverbs, and so forth), the context (the historical and literary basis), the content (the meaning of the words), and the relationships among passages in different books and different parts of the Bible (a study Bible will help you do this by listing cross-references). Then courageously pursue a response: we are to be "doers of the word, and not hearers only" (James 1:22).<sup>32</sup> Personally, I like to journal about what I am learning, *share* with others what I'm learning, and find ways to live the text out practically *that day*.

Through the Bible, God is shaping us into the image of his Son. It's not a mechanical process like flipping a light switch; it's more like blowing on the embers of a fire to kindle it into flame so that we may be on fire for understanding who God is and how we are part of the great story he is telling.

Although Christians find God's story deeply compelling, there are others who find it to be a negative influence, and possibly even dangerous. Their objections are numerous, and one of the key goals of *Understanding the Faith* is to address those objections in a way that allows us to see God's story even more powerfully than before.

## 9. What External Evidence Demonstrates That God Actually Exists?

As we examined the biblical metanarrative of creation, fall, and redemption in this text, and as we dealt with questions about the authority of Scripture, we assumed that we will better understand the flow of history—indeed, the character of God himself—if we take the Bible as seriously as it takes itself. What evidence or reasoning apart from Scripture supports the Bible's claims about God? If God made everything, who made him? Why is belief in God so important when unbelievers seem capable of living just as morally as believers? Isn't belief in God a matter of cultural preference?

People want to know whether the biblical story about God is anything more than an interesting historical artifact. It's not just that people want evidence; it's that they want to test the Christian idea of God to see if it stands up to scrutiny. Scripture says that the evidence for God's existence is clearly seen (Rom. 1:20).<sup>33</sup> Although Scripture's truth does not rise or fall on whether "God meets the test" of evidence or reasoning, we saw in this book three different sets of reasons that enable us to logically understand God's existence.

**Cosmological Argument. Cosmology** is the study of the order, structure, and design of the universe. The **cosmological argument** says that everything that exists has an explanation for its existence. The universe obviously exists. The only sufficient explanation for its existence is

> The cosmological argument says that everything that exists has an explanation for its existence. The universe obviously exists. The only sufficient explanation for its existence is God.

<!-- page-466 -->

**kalam cosmological argument** was developed by Islamic philosophers who sought to explain how they could know about the supernatural when our tools of understanding seem to work only inside of nature. These philosophers reasoned that whatever begins to exist has a cause. The universe began to exist; therefore, the universe has a cause.

> *Kalam Cosmological Argument:* an argument for God's existence that begins with the premise that something caused the universe to exist and ends with the conclusion that God is the best explanation for that cause.

Of course, many object to these cosmological arguments, saying that they make an unsupportable assumption of how God came to exist: "If God made the universe, who made God?" they ask. We saw in chapter 10, though, that there must be one eternal uncaused causer or nothing would have ever come into existence. And although such scientists as Stephen Hawking point out that it is possible for particles to emerge out of a pure vacuum, a vacuum isn't really "nothing," and neither are the laws of physics by which such a process would take place.

**Design Argument.** According to the **design argument**, the world appears to be the product of design. A design requires an intelligent designer. That designer is God. Just as we can see that Mount Rushmore's rock formations resembling George Washington, Thomas Jefferson, Teddy Roosevelt, and Abraham Lincoln were not caused by natural processes, so too can we observe specified complexity in the natural world. Not only does there appear to be fine-tuning in the universe, but we see complex biological information that cannot be explained by Darwinian mechanisms. We live on "a privileged planet."

> *Design Argument (aka Teleological Argument):* an argument for God's existence that begins with the premise that design requires an intelligent designer and ends with the conclusion that God is the best explanation for the observable design within the universe.

Some say that the extreme odds of the universe coming into existence exactly as needed to support life on earth can be overcome if there are an infinite number of universes. Unfortunately, for proponents of this multiverse theory, there has yet to emerge a scientifically credible, plausible mechanism for generating these many worlds. Not only that, but no scientist has proposed a way we could ever check to see if these other universes actually exist. Multiverse theory is little more than a guess, and one that people seem to make primarily to avoid acknowledging a designer.

**Moral Argument. Objective morality**—morality that is always true across all times and cultures—exists because there is a moral law giver, and that lawgiver is God. Humans have a sense of right or wrong, of "oughtness," that is deeper than mere personal preference. The **moral argument** says that if God does not exist, objective moral values and duties do not exist. Objective moral values and duties *do* exist; therefore, God exists.

> The moral argument says that if God does not exist, objective moral values and duties do not exist.

<!-- page-467 -->

Of course, there are objections to the moral argument. The first is that objective morality doesn't exist. But with few exceptions, every person seems to have a sense of what's right and wrong, of what's good and evil. We humans view right and wrong as being objectively real, which means that rightness and wrongness depend on something far deeper and more solid than human opinion. Very few people would say that the very bad things that have happened in this world are only wrong for people who *say* they are wrong. A more serious objection to the moral argument is that nonbelievers can live good lives without God. The issue, though, isn't whether atheists can be moral but whether atheism can *explain* morality apart from God. It is not whether we *believe* in God that makes morality objective but whether he actually exists. If he does, objective moral truths are explainable and defensible. If he does not, they are mere cultural or individual preferences.

> We humans view right and wrong as being objectively real, which means that rightness and wrongness depend on something far deeper and more solid than human opinion.

## 10. Isn't Belief in God a Cultural Phenomenon?

Some object, "You find those reasons for God's existence plausible only because you grew up in a culture where belief in God is normal." The argument that religious beliefs are just cultural phenomena, artifacts of where we grew up, makes sense on the surface. After all, a person growing up in India is more likely to be Hindu than Christian. The only way we could hold this view, though, is if we were in a position to know that there is no real substance to religious claims beyond the fact that they are culturally situated. But this in itself is a claim to know something about religion to be true.

The biblical view, which is widely accepted across all cultures, is not that other religions are devoid of truth but rather that biblical Christianity accurately describes the contours of the world as it actually is better than other religious systems. Christians base this claim on what the Bible says about God, humanity, and reality and how this understanding has worked itself out since Bible times.

Others will say, "Your arguments about God's existence are just word play." This argument, based on the idea of **Postmodernism**, says that when we claim to know objective reality, we are just using language to construct our own meaning shaped by our culture and life experiences. The argument states that books such as the Bible are just words connected to subjective experiences, not true statements about reality. It seems like a powerful argument until we realize that objects and thoughts have qualities that present themselves consistently to the mind, no matter who is thinking about them. Even people who believe that love is a social construction still know the difference between loving a person and killing that person. Christians do not disagree that we can use talk to create concepts that can be acted on to create real things in the world. But Scripture views talk about God in a different way than other kinds of talk. The talk of Scripture is intended to communicate truth that applies to all people at all times in all cultures.

<!-- page-468 -->

An extreme version of Postmodernism goes even further, though, asserting that trying to change a culture through a worldview such as Christianity is a form of genocide that destroys that culture's history and practices. But as we saw earlier, careful research into the history of missions has shown that although many non-Christian ways of "civilizing" the natives (some of which were practiced by professed Christians) have done harm, Christian missionaries have, on balance, done a great deal of good in bringing freedom, health, and peace to cultures around the world as well as preserving native music, culture, and language.

At the end of the day, there is strong evidence that God exists, that the sort of God whose existence we can deduce through reasonable arguments matches the description of the God of the Bible, and that this understanding goes beyond cultural practices and how we use words. The good news of the gospel is that our salvation is not just for "us"; it is for the world, enabling us to share the good news—in both word and deed—with everyone everywhere.

When people insist that God does not exist or that our understanding of him is culturally bound and not actually true, they're doing so based on two assumptions about the world that, in the end, are unsupported by evidence. Perhaps we should turn the spotlight on these unwarranted assumptions as part of making sense of the Bible's claims.

## 11. Shining the Spotlight on Critics' Unwarranted Assumptions

Theoretically, it is possible to believe in a God from whom the universe proceeds, who designed the world, and who established a moral law yet still doubt whether God is active in the world today. The Bible indicates very strongly that God not only exists but also superintends the world he has made and even intervenes miraculously in it. Some are embarrassed by the Bible's claims. They see them as, at best, a distraction from Jesus's moral teachings and, at worst, a silly fantasy produced by overactive imaginations. One philosopher who articulated this objection was David Hume (1711–1776), who said that miracles are by definition the suspension of the natural order, that nature develops in a uniform fashion, that miracles cannot occur in such a world, and that therefore they most likely have not occurred.

> *Miracle:* a supernatural sign or event that is intended to highlight the power and goodness of God.

Theologically, the Bible presents a **miracle** as an event that *restores*, rather than *suspends*, the natural order. Miracles are presented in the Bible as having freed the Hebrews from slavery, displayed God's power over evil, restored sick people to health, and showed God's love of abundant provision. But aside from this theological point, the argument Hume articulates against miracles has been criticized as being a circular argument. Saying that miracles have never happened because our experience in the world is of uniformity is to say that all reports of miracles are false. The reason for believing them to be false, though, is that no such miracles are possible. That's like saying, "I'm full because I'm not hungry," or, "The conclusion and, in effect, says nothing.

<!-- page-469 -->

The circular nature of Hume's argument against miracles highlights critics' two unwarranted assumptions: **materialism** and **naturalism**. To say, "Only the natural world exists; therefore, the supernatural does not exist," does not prove that only the natural world exists: it *assumes* that only the natural world exists and bases its criticisms of the supernatural on that assumption. Similarly, to *proclaim* that only the material world exists is not to *prove* that it does but to *assume* that it does. The best an honest person can say is "I believe only the material world exists" or "In my experience, I have no basis on which to say anything but the material world exists" or "I have not encountered evidence that anything outside the material world exists."

> *Naturalism:* the belief that all phenomena can be explained in terms of natural causes.

> *Secularism:* an atheistic and materialistic worldview that advocates for a public society free from the influence of religion.

> *Dualism:* the belief that reality is ultimately composed of two essential substances.

> *Minimal Facts Approach:* a method formulated by Gary Habermas for investigating the resurrection of Jesus that concentrates only on the historical facts that are so well evidenced that they are accepted by nearly every scholar who studies the topic.

In my experience, it is rare for people who hold to materialism and naturalism to qualify or defend their assumptions. Many times, they don't even realize they're making assumptions at all. They think they're just being scientific. But materialism/naturalism are unwarranted assumptions for at least two reasons. First, they presume too much of science and seek to make **Secularism** absolute. Saying that science replaces religion isn't making a statement of fact but rather revealing a narrow framework for understanding reality. Instead, we ought to seriously consider the idea that both the material and immaterial world exist (i.e., an acceptable form of **dualism**). We have brains, but we also have minds. Ideas such as justice and love and liberty are not just social constructs; they are categories of meaning that exist whether or not we have trained our senses to perceive them. A growing amount of reasoning and evidence is showing that the materialist/naturalist assumption that "what we see is all there is" is simply insufficient to explain the data of how the mind functions and how humans experience life and death.

Second, credible reports of miracles also show materialism/naturalism to be unwarranted assumptions. In *Understanding the Faith*, we have examined the claims that the Bible's accounts of miracles are unsupportable and found that, in addition to credible claims of thousands of miracles that have been catalogued, the biblical account is remarkably well supported for having been recorded so long ago.<sup>34</sup> The Bible writers took great care in transmitting their heritage, and many of its claims are supported by completely secular sources. The biblical accounts are specific enough in detail to conclude that the historical scenes in which miracles occurred could, in fact, have occurred just as reported.

<!-- page-470 -->

One miracle in particular commands attention because it is so central to the Christian faith: the resurrection of Jesus of Nazareth. The **minimal facts approach** that the vast majority of scholars accept as valid points to the following facts: Jesus died by crucifixion, his disciples believed he rose and appeared to them, the apostle Paul was radically converted by what he believed was a personal encounter with Jesus, and the skeptic James (Jesus's brother) was suddenly changed. But there is other intriguing evidence as well: the tomb was empty, and more than five hundred people witnessed the resurrected Christ and were forever changed. This strong historical evidence led the respected theologian N. T. Wright to say, "The widespread belief and practice of the early Christians is only explicable if we assume that they all believed that Jesus was bodily raised."<sup>35</sup>

If the grave cannot keep him, then evil certainly cannot. The Gospels show Jesus's power over evil. Jesus did not treat demonic manifestation or the existence of Satan as vain superstitions but instead used them as opportunities to put Satan and his minions in their place and lay bare Israel's false gods. Materialism/naturalism tempts us to trivialize evil, but the biblical account warns us not to be deceived or fall prey to evil through doubt, irrational fear, or self-accusation.

When we open our minds and hearts to the possibility that materialism and naturalism are inadequate ways of seeing the world, we become capable of seeing the world as God sees it and responding to Christ as one who has authority over everything in heaven and on earth. Giving up materialist/naturalist assumptions is harder than it looks, though, because of the steady drumbeat of the message that "science shows Christianity to be nothing more than a primitive superstition." Fortunately, as we have seen, the relationship between Christianity and science is nothing like we are learning from today's culture.

## 12. The Battle between Christianity and Science

In spite of the flawed reasoning of those arguing against miracles—and even the evidence that the supernatural, immaterial world actually exists—materialists/naturalists are not prepared to concede the battle. The "Christianity is defeated by science" refrain dies hard. True, some faith systems are incompatible with modern science, but Christianity is not one of them. Scientists operating out of a Christian framework, such as Isaac Newton and Robert Boyle, are responsible for a great deal of modern science. In fact, of the fifty-two active scientists who made the most significant contributions during the Scientific Revolution, only one was an atheist. Sixty percent were devout Christians.<sup>36</sup> In spite of this, many otherwise-intelligent people still believe the now discredited notion that Christianity is a superstition that led to an age of ignorance and that the world was rescued by science.

Indeed, as authors Nancy Pearcey and Charles Thaxton point out, science's underlying assumptions can be derived only from a belief in a divine creator. These assumptions include not only the orderliness and lawfulness of the universe but also the beliefs that nature is valuable enough to study, nature is good, nature's laws can be precisely stated and understood, humans can discover nature's order, and it is possible—and good—to observe nature and describe it in a rationally intelligent fashion.<sup>37</sup>

Even more intriguing, although the Bible is not a book of science, it is consistent with many things scientists have discovered about the world, including the inherent design in

<!-- page-471 -->

the natural world, that something outside the universe brought it into being, that life does not come from nonlife, that there is intention and order in creation, the nature of humanity as a self-reflective species capable of symbolic communication and higher levels of social organization, and that there are limits to change in nature. Although differences over biblical interpretation and the age of the earth are real and serious, most Christians agree that God is the Creator and that humans are morally culpable creations in a broken-but-privileged relationship with him. As C. S. Lewis puts it, "In science we have been reading only the notes to a poem; in Christianity we find the poem itself."<sup>38</sup>

So far in this chapter, we've summarized what we've learned in *Understanding the Faith* about the internal and external evidence for the Bible, the coherence of its metanarrative, the logic of its postulates, and the unwarranted assumptions of those who question its authority. In view of this evidence, one would think that critics might at least grudgingly acknowledge that belief in the Bible is not unreasonable. Instead, a whole new line of argument has developed saying that the very act of claiming truth is intolerant and that the bigotry and violence of Scripture ought to serve as a warning against biblical thinking. What, if anything, ought we to say about this?

## 13. Isn't Claiming the Truth Intolerant?

In the last couple of decades, people who oppose God's authority have begun arguing that the very act of *claiming* to be right is what is wrong with Christianity. The word **tolerance** means recognizing and respecting the dignity of people you think are wrong. A new view of tolerance has arisen, though, that pegs Christians as intolerant people who demean other beliefs and threaten harmony in our world. To this view, tolerance means accepting each religious viewpoint as no more or less true than any other. The only way for Christians to be viewed as tolerant, accordingly, is to forfeit the belief that Jesus died for everyone and is the true way to God. This, of course, guts the gospel at the heart of historic Christianity.

> The word tolerance means recognizing and respecting the dignity of people you think are wrong.

At the risk of being shut out of today's public dialogue, Christians need to identify and respond to the two sources of the "Christianity is intolerant" attack. The first source is Postmodernism. Postmodernism is the worldview that says language is so culturally bound that it cannot adequately describe reality. Postmodernism rejects all metanarratives (except for the metanarrative that says no metanarrative is objectively true). But if our language does not point to any truth, then the claim that "Christians are intolerant" can't be true. Nor can the claim that God's existence is unknowable be true because it, too, is a claim about reality. The second source of the "Christianity is intolerant" claim is **prescriptive religious pluralism**, the idea that all religious viewpoints are equally valid. Pluralism comes in two forms. "Pluralism 1.0" says that religious truth is individual: we all have our own truths and should not judge

> *Prescriptive Pluralism:* the belief that we should be tolerant of other religions because no single religion can be universally true for everyone.

<!-- page-472 -->

the truth claims of others. "Pluralism 2.0" says that religious truth is cultural and that we are each raised in certain religious traditions and can't help believing in them, so we must tolerate the claims of other cultures.

What gets lost in the discussion about tolerance is what is actually meant by truth. Pluralists mean by truth what a given person or most of the people in the culture think of as true. But something is true if and only if it lines up with the way things actually are. To make a truth claim, we must know the difference between facts and opinions. Saying that Bill Clinton was president of the United States in 1993 is different from claiming that medium-rare steak is best. One is a fact; the other is an opinion. As soon as any worldview posits answers to questions about humanity, death, thinking, morality, or the meaning of history, it is claiming to know something about the nature of reality. Such claims cannot be true for one person and false for someone else, especially if they are contrary to one another.

As we saw earlier, Christianity claims that the Bible describes the contours of the world as it actually exists more accurately than other religions. Further, Christianity says, this truth is observable by anyone who has not suppressed his or her understanding by other commitments. It is justifiably believed. Christianity's moral commands, such as "Thou shalt not murder" and "Thou shalt not bear false witness," work to produce a good society, but this is not what makes them good. They are good because they reflect God's nature and character, and this is why they work.

There are three ways to defuse wrong ideas of tolerance. First, point out how tolerance claims commit suicide, so to speak. For example, if someone says, "Who are you to judge others?" the response should be "Is it your judgment that I should not judge?" If someone says, "There is no truth," the response is "Is that statement true?" A **self-refuting claim** kills itself. Second, ask questions such as "What do you mean by that?" "How did you come to that conclusion?" and "What happens if you are wrong?" Third, have a good attitude. Be humble and transparent and listen well. Having a good attitude does not mean that God's truth is up for debate; rather, it shows openness and a willingness to converse in the hope that God will "grant them repentance" and lead them to the truth (2 Tim. 2:25–26).<sup>39</sup>

At root, people who question whether Christianity is intolerant are asking a deeper question: Is the God of the Bible *good*? After all, in spite of the Bible's moral teachings, it sometimes seems as if God is not playing by his own rules. If God is truly good and powerful, why does evil exist, and why is suffering such a part of reality?

## 14. Why Is There Evil and Suffering?

Every worldview must grapple with the problem of evil. Some worldviews do so by saying, "Bad things happen. That's just the way it is." Other worldviews say, "Evil is an illusion," "Evil is what you get for having done bad things in past lives," "Evil happens because rich people take money away from the poor," or even "Evil is punishment for not living a life pleasing to the deity [or deities]." The question is not just how a good God could allow evil but whether, if evil actually exists, the Bible's explanation of it is the most sensible one.

<!-- page-473 -->

If someone asks you how God could allow evil, ask, "What do you mean by evil?" Is evil something that actually exists, or is it just a category for things we prefer not to happen? To know that something is evil, we have to know that it is not the way it is supposed to be. Where do we get this sense of "oughtness"? If what the Bible says about God is untrue, there is no reason to expect that our sense of what ought to be is reasonable.

The biblical answer to evil and suffering is not *what* but *who*. Through his Son, Jesus Christ, God has entered into our suffering, has conquered death and hell, and will set the world to rights. It is Christianity that makes sense of the past, explaining how humans created for *shalom* chose to go their own way and were permitted by God to do so, even though they were miserable. It makes sense of the present, showing how a God who is purposeful and unlimited in understanding knows the choices of free creatures and works things out so that his good, desired end is achieved. It also makes sense of the future. We are not bound by fate; God is in charge and moving the world toward the consummation of his sovereign plan.

Through suffering, we are forced to realize that the chief end of humanity is not temporal happiness but an intimate relationship with God. Nothing in the Bible denies or explains away the reality of suffering. In fact, many biblical authors cry out to God in pain. But the Bible does counsel in response to suffering an unshakable confidence in God's goodness.

God is not aloof or incomprehensible. He does not encourage us to ignore evil or treat it as an illusion. We do not have a pantheon of reckless gods who are incapable of solving great problems. We have, instead, a God who is with us. In the light of the cross, we can see clearly what is right and wrong, good and evil. And *because* of the cross, we have hope that God will conquer evil. In fact, the entire story of the Bible is how he is doing just that.

Yet it seems that part of the Bible's answer to the problem of evil and suffering—the doctrine of hell—may catch many people unaware in its trap and actually make the problem worse. Is there a way to reconcile God's goodness with this severe doctrine?

## 15. What's the Deal with Hell?

Hell is part of God's answer to evil and suffering. Judgment eventually comes to the wicked. But this leads to a problem most Christians wish they didn't have. Jesus lavished compassion on the suffering, died for the sins of the world, and taught widely admired moral principles, yet he referred to hell more than anyone else quoted in the Bible. How could a loving God—and his loving, savior Son—condemn anyone to such a fate, especially those who have never heard?

The Bible clearly teaches the existence of hell. It describes hell as a place of outer darkness, away from the heavenly city, a perpetually burning dump, a place of anguish and regret, and an eternal separation from God. Hell is the other direction from God. Suffering in hell is both physical and spiritual and it goes on forever.

Hell's seriousness underscores the immensity of God's mercy. What we need is not a scratch behind the ear, like a pet. We need saving, and we can't rescue ourselves. But isn't hell too extreme of a punishment for those who try to save themselves? Aside from serial killers and mass murderers and child abusers, who could possibly deserve such a fate? Although we can sympathize with people who wonder about this, we must remember that the desire to be away from God's immediate presence is what sin is all about. Hell is not something foisted

<!-- page-474 -->

upon unsuspecting innocents but a place where people finally get what they want: to be apart from God. Ultimately, those who go to hell know exactly why they're there.

Even as we consider difficult questions such as "Does God send children to hell?" and "What about those who have never heard?" we can conclude that God is loving and just and will not act inconsistently with his character. So although the doctrine of hell seems like very bad news at first glance, it is actually part of God's very good news: love does indeed win. God wins. Good triumphs over evil. Humanity is not doomed after all. This good news, based on the authority of Jesus, must be shared with everyone in the world.

Yet those who doubt God's goodness point to something beyond the doctrine of hell: they point to passages in Scripture that seem to show God as a bully. Why would God command his people to wipe out entire people groups? Does God hate homosexuals? Doesn't the Bible endorse slavery? Isn't the Bible oppressive to women? If we want to communicate biblical truth to today's world, we need to figure out what the Bible actually teaches about such things.

## 16. Is God a Mean Bully?

The Bible reveals God as dynamic, active, involved, and personal. He describes his people as his family, his congregation, his treasured possession, those he made holy, and a kingdom of priests. If God is really like this, though, why would he seemingly command things that are so clearly evil? Let's take a look at several criticisms people make of the Bible in this regard.

**Does God command genocide?** According to Old Testament accounts, God commanded his people to wipe out entire people groups. How can this be justified? The question is not as simple as it first appears. It is clear from the Bible that God wanted his chosen people to avoid the lifestyle of the surrounding Canaanites, whose acts of child sacrifice, temple prostitution, incest, and bestiality were deeply corrupt and evil. Moreover, both the Canaanites and the Amalekites, another nearby people group, openly committed themselves to Israel's destruction. Is war justified in this case? Probably so.

But what about the killing of women and children—isn't that still evil? As we saw, the Israelite accounts of "banning" or "consecrating people to destruction" were written in the typical battle-report language of the time and clearly did not represent the actual killing of every person. Rather, it seems that it is a socially acceptable form of hyperbole, akin to sports fans cheering their team to "crush" the opponent in defeat, not demanding their actual killing.

**Does God hate homosexuals?** The Old Testament book of Leviticus displays a strong concern about sexual sin, especially sins that harm or demean women and children. To God, sexual sin is not just an innocent, private act between two people. It produces shame, breaks down relationships, shatters trust, and prevents people from being the kind of blessing God intended. It takes the *very good* aspects of creation and turns them into a source of hurt and diminishment. The children of Israel were a set-apart community, the likes of which do not exist today. No one *had* to stay there, but if they did stay, they agreed to not singled out.

<!-- page-475 -->

**Is God pro-slavery?** Slavery has been common everywhere and at all times throughout history. What changed that is the Bible's emphasis that everyone bears the image of God. In the New Testament, the radical equality of slaves becomes clear. Slaves were treated as brothers, and those who traded humans as cargo or kidnapped others to bring them into slavery were condemned.<sup>40</sup>

**Is God anti-woman?** The Bible also is a book that—in a complete break from the norms of the time—gave unparalleled dignity to women. Especially in a Greek culture in which husbands and fathers had supreme, absolute power over their wives and children, Jesus is good news for women. In the ministry of Jesus, and later in the ministries of the apostles, women gained a stature unheard of in those times, even to the point where the gospel accounts of the resurrection acknowledge that women were the first to testify to Jesus's resurrection, even though their testimony would have been scorned in court. No wonder conversion to Christianity in ancient times was more prevalent among females than males.

In a fallen world, things often do not turn out as we expect. Good intentions go awry. People—indeed, entire cultures—fail to live up to their ideals. Evil exists. People suffer. How could a good God allow this? And how can we take the Bible seriously when it seems to *promote* suffering by condemning nonbelievers to an eternity in hell? Are these objections to the Bible simply too great to overcome? Let's review each in turn.

## 17. If Christianity Is True, Why Do People Walk Away?

As we come to the close of this book, we believe that it is reasonable to acknowledge the validity of the Bible's case for itself, the case made for it in light of external evidence, and the answers it provides to life's ultimate questions. Yet many are skeptical: some because they are seeking the truth, and others because they are avoiding it. There seem to be six reasons people turn away from Christianity:

1. **Lack of knowledge.** They haven't taken time to examine the claims of Christianity or the Bible, and they make assumptions about both that simply are unwarranted.

2. **Misunderstanding of belief.** They assume that faith is what they make it or what they've always been taught or what they feel rather than what they are led to through wisdom and knowledge.

3. **Conflicting commitments.** They're committed to a certain lifestyle or way of seeing things that they recognize is in conflict with biblical revelation, and they are unwilling to let those commitments go and embrace the truth.

4. **Practical atheism.** They believe in God but live as if he doesn't exist or is irrelevant to most of life.<sup>41</sup>

5. **Effects of sin.** Their bad habits erode sensitivity to the work of the Holy Spirit in their lives.

<!-- page-476 -->

6. **Distraction.** They fill their lives with the intellectual equivalent of empty calories: food that makes them feel full even if it is of dubious nutritional value.

The common denominator in all six of these reasons is that they lead to doubt. Doubt itself is not shocking. Biblical heroes experienced doubt. Notable Christians throughout history experienced doubt.

Overcoming doubt and disbelief calls for more than just intellectual solutions, though such solutions have tremendous power when rightly understood. We need other people. We need community with believers. Such a community can help us develop patience as we work through our doubts. It can give us a hopeful way to live even when we sense there is much we do not understand. Its members can share answers they've found helpful. In the church, we find safety and perspective as well as teaching and repentance. Doubt may encourage us to shrink away, but if we let it move us *toward* God's people instead, we gain strength and the opportunity to flourish as we prepare to be a blessing to the nations of the earth.

## 18. Conclusion

It's not just that there are many worldviews and that people are content to take them or leave them. The reality is that certain worldviews seem to be discontent with anything less than dismantling the Christian worldview. If we do not seek to influence the world for what is good and true, the proponents of what is bad and false will compromise the church's influence on the world.

> **If we do not seek to influence the world for what is good and true, the proponents of what is bad and false will compromise the church's influence on the world.**

Our situation today is similar to when Israel was taken captive in Babylon. The Babylonians were militarily strong, but they sensed that if they wanted to win over the long term, they had to mentor the rising generations. They set about training the best of the Hebrew boys to embrace pagan philosophies and become leaders who would spread the Babylonian message throughout the world.

There was, however, a sticking point in the Babylonians' plan. Actually, there were four. Their names were Daniel, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego. They refused to bow the knee to false gods. They trusted God's Word and stood strong—so strong, in fact, that they became leaders in the Babylonian government. Rather than convert to Babylonian ways, they converted some of Babylon's leaders to God's way.

This is the kind of leader we need today. It doesn't matter if you are outnumbered. It has been said that one person sincerely committed to a cause is more valuable than a thousand who are merely interested.<sup>42</sup> What we need is not a crowd of people lurching toward the truth but instead a handful of brave souls who will embrace God's revelation in the Bible and stand for truth, whatever the odds. The world is crying out for a few to say, "By God's grace, here I stand." For those who rise, it will change everything. It might even change the world.

> **It doesn't matter if you are outnumbered. It has been said that one person sincerely committed to a cause is more valuable than a thousand who are merely interested.**

## Endnotes

<!-- page-477 -->

1. 1 Chronicles 12:32: "… of Issachar, men who had understanding of the times, to know what Israel ought to do, 200 chiefs, and all their kinsmen under their command."
2. Isaiah 30:21: "Your ears shall hear a word behind you, saying, 'This is the way, walk in it,' when you turn to the right or when you turn to the left."
3. Deuteronomy 30:19: "I call heaven and earth to witness against you today, that I have set before you life and death, blessing and curse. Therefore choose life, that you and your offspring may live."
4. John 8:32: "You will know the truth, and the truth will set you free."
5. Nancy Pearcey, *Saving Leonardo: A Call to Resist the Secular Assault on Mind, Morals, and Meaning* (Nashville: B&H, 2010), 27.
6. J. P. Moreland, *Love Your God with All Your Mind: The Role of Reason in the Life of the Soul*, rev. and updated ed. (Colorado Springs, CO: NavPress, 2012), 21–22.
7. Revelation 19:16: "On his robe and on his thigh he has a name written, King of kings and Lord of lords."
8. 2 Peter 3:9: "The Lord is not slow to fulfill his promise as some count slowness, but is patient toward you, not wishing that any should perish, but that all should reach repentance."
9. Alexis de Tocqueville, *Democracy in America*, ed. J. P. Mayer, trans. George Lawrence (New York: Harper Perennial, 1969), 291.
10. Dawkins specifically referenced the King James Version of the Bible, which was produced during a time of rich development for the English language. See Richard Dawkins, "Why I Want All Our Children to Read the King James Bible," *The Guardian*, May 19, 2012, www.guardian.co.uk/science/2012/may/19/richard-dawkins-king-james-bible.
11. As we saw earlier, the Hebrew word *galah* and the Greek word *apokalupto* "express the idea of uncovering what was concealed." Millard Erickson, *Christian Theology*, 2nd ed. (Grand Rapids, MI: Baker, 2001), 201.
12. Biblical references for these claims include the following: Jesus asserted authority (Matt. 7:28–29; Mark 28–12); Jesus claimed to be the "I am" of the Old Testament (John 8:58); Jesus said that he and God were "one" essence (John 10:30); and Jesus told his followers that those who had seen him had seen God (John 14:7–9).
13. See Matthew 4:1–10.
14. The following passages support these claims: Jesus conferred authority on his disciples (Matt. 10:1; 11:27); and Jesus indicated that this authority extended far beyond the time boundaries of his own earthly ministry (John 14:25–26; 15:26–27; 16:12–15).
15. 2 Timothy 3:16: "All Scripture is breathed out by God and profitable for teaching, for reproof, for correction, and for training in righteousness."
16. Gordon R. Lewis, "What Does It Mean That God Inspired the Bible?," in Ted Cabal et al., eds., *The Apologetics Study Bible* (Nashville: B&H, 2007), 1812.
17. Douglas R. Groothuis, *Christian Apologetics: A Comprehensive Case for Biblical Faith* (Downers Grove, IL: IVP Academic, 2011), 124.
18. The theological doctrine that, with the Holy Spirit superintending it, the Bible is without error is called the doctrine of inerrancy. There are many versions of this doctrine, but all seem to agree that, as David Dockery puts it, the Bible is accurate in all it affirms "to the degree of precision intended by the author, in all matters relating to God and his creation." David S. Dockery, *Christian Scripture: An Evangelical Perspective on Inspiration, Authority, and Interpretation* (Nashville: B&H, 1995), 64.
19. J. Ed Komoszewski, M. James Sawyer, and Daniel B. Wallace, *Reinventing Jesus: How Contemporary Skeptics Miss the Real Jesus and Mislead Popular Culture* (Grand Rapids, MI: Kregel, 2006), 82.
20. Frank Newport, "More than 9 in 10 Americans Continue to Believe in God," Gallup, June 3, 2011, www.gallup.com/poll/147887/americans-continue-believe-god.aspx.
21. For detailed descriptions of research in these four categories, see the work of Baylor University sociologists Paul Froese and Christopher Bader, *America's Four Gods* (New York: Oxford, 2010), 33–34. It is worth repeating an observation from a footnote in chapter 4: that *authoritative* and *judgmental* are loaded terms in today's world. God certainly does have authority in his universe, but his love and authority work in concert, not in opposition. The Bible proclaims God to be a completely balanced being, exercising grace, mercy, and loving-kindness alongside authority and judgment, without contradiction. God does judge humans but does so as a just and all-knowing deity who has a right to judge and does so with understanding and mercy.
22. See Jeremiah 9:23–24 and Deuteronomy 29:29.
23. Hebrews 1:1–2: "Long ago, at many times and in many ways, God spoke to our fathers by the prophets, but in these last days he has spoken to us by his Son, whom he appointed the heir of all things, through whom also he created the world."
24. References for these attributes of God include the following: holy (Isa. 6:3; Rev. 4:8), eternal (Ps. 90:2; Deut. 33:27), all-knowing (Rom. 11:33; Isa. 46:8–11), all-powerful (Jer. 32:17; Mark 10:27), everywhere present (Jer. 23:23–24; Ps. 139:7–10), unchanging (Ps. 33:11; Mal. 3:6), wise (Rom. 11:33; Ps. 104:24), righteous (Deut. 32:4; Ps. 89:14), loving (John 17:20–23; Deut. 33:12), and mercifully gracious (Ps. 103:8; Neh. 9:17).
25. J. Scott Horrell, "The Eternal Son of God in the Social Trinity," in *Jesus in Trinitarian Perspective: An Introductory Christology*, ed. Fred Sanders and Klaus Issler (Nashville: B&H Academic, 2007), 47–48.
26. Biblical references for these claims include the following: God is one essence (Eph. 4:4–6), the Father is God (1 Cor. 8:6), Jesus is God (Titus 2:13), and the Holy Spirit is God (1 Cor. 6:11). Scripture also contains several passages that refer to the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit together (for example, Matt. 3:16–17; 28:19–20; 2 Cor. 13:14; Heb. 9:14; and 1 Pet. 1:1–2).
27. Genesis 6:5: "The LORD saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth, and that every intention of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually."
28. Judges 17:6: "In those days there was no king in Israel. Everyone did what was right in his own eyes."
29. Matthew 4:17: "From that time Jesus began to preach, saying, 'Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.'"
30. Galatians 3:6–9: "… just as Abraham 'believed God, and it was counted to him as righteousness'? Know then that it is those of faith who are the sons of Abraham. And the Scripture, foreseeing that God would justify the Gentiles by faith, preached the gospel beforehand to Abraham, saying, 'In you shall all the nations be blessed.' So then, those who are of faith are blessed along with Abraham, the man of faith."
31. Jeremiah 29:7: "Seek the welfare of the city where I have sent you into exile, and pray to the LORD on its behalf, for in its welfare you will find your welfare."
32. James 1:22: "Be doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving yourselves."
33. Romans 1:20: "His invisible attributes, namely, his eternal power and divine nature, have been clearly perceived, ever since the creation of the world, in the things that have been made. So they are without excuse."
34. Most recently, see Eric Metaxas, *Miracles: What They Are, Why They Happen, and How They Can Change Your Life* (New York: Dutton, 2014).
35. N. T. Wright, *The Resurrection of the Son of God* (Minneapolis: Fortress, 2003), 710.
36. Stark outlines his methodology in chap. 2, "God's Handiwork: The Religious Origins of Science," in *To the Glory of God: How Monotheism Led to Reformations, Science, Witch-Hunts, and the End of Slavery* (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2003), 160–63. Of the fifty-two scientists Stark examined, half were Catholic and half were Protestant. Only two, Edmund Halley and Paracelsus, qualified as skeptics, and Halley was probably, Stark concludes, an atheist.
37. This brief list is admirably explained, illustrated, and footnoted in Nancy Pearcey and Charles Thaxton, *The Soul of Science: Christian Faith and Natural Philosophy* (Wheaton, IL: Crossway, 1994), 21–37.
38. Clyde S. Kilby, ed., *A Mind Awake: An Anthology of C. S. Lewis* (New York: Harcourt, Brace & World, 1968), 240.
39. 2 Timothy 2:25–26: "… correcting his opponents with gentleness. God may perhaps grant them repentance leading to a knowledge of the truth, and they may come to their senses and escape from the snare of the devil, after being captured by him to do his will."
40. See Galatians 3:28; 1 Corinthians 12:13; Colossians 3:11; Philemon v. 16; Revelation 18:11–13; and 1 Timothy 1:9–10.
41. See Craig M. Gay, *The Way of the Modern World* (Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 1998), 239.
42. Attributed to William E. Brown.

<!-- page-478 -->

25. J. Scott Horrell, "The Eternal Son of God in the Social Trinity," in *Jesus in Trinitarian Perspective: An Introductory Christology*, ed. Fred Sanders and Klaus Issler (Nashville: B&H Academic, 2007), 47–48.
