# Chapter 1

<!-- page-1 -->

Understanding the Lessons- Continued
Key Terms and Key
Verses for each
chapter are always
listed on Lesson 9.
Allow students to study for the
Chapter 1 Test. Have them rurn
to the Study Guide in their
student manual and complete
une exercises.
Key Terms
worldview
Christian
Key Verses
Luke 18:22
A thorough list of
discussion questions
and answers help lead
students in understanding
the material.
1. How is a worldview like a map? Give examples of some
worldviews.
A worldview is like a map because a worldview is a partern of ideas
and beliefs that helps u
us make sense of the world. A worldview helps
uide our decisions and actions. Examples of worldviews include
hristianity, Islam, secularism, Marxism, new spirituality, and
postmodernism. In the same way that having
cause you to get lost, having the wrong worldview can also have dire
couscouchees
2. Explain why it is wrong to say that to be a Christian vou have
to meet one of three conditions: you must be born into a
Christian family, you must follow certain rules, or you must
focus only on heaven.
It is wrong to say those things because they are misconceptions
about Christianity. A Christian is a person who follows Christ.
Even if you are not born into a Christian family, you can become
a Christian when you decide to follow Jesus. You
Christian by following a set of rules. Though Christians do try to
obey God's commands found in the Bible, they do not cease to be
Christians if they fail to obey them all. While focusing on heaven
is good, Christians are also supposed to care about the people Jesus
died to save. Christians have a responsibility to share the good news
with others to bring healing and hope to the world.
3. What do Christians believe about Jesus?
Christians believe that Jesus was more than a good teacher or a
spiritual sage. He was a human being who was without sin and lived
a blameless life. He was also God himself. He came to Israel, but he
was not the political leader that the Jews were expecting. He healed
people and taught them, and then he was crucifed. He was dead for
three days and then he rose from the dead. He ascended to heaven
but will come to Earth one day to judge everyone. Jesus is the
Messiah. He is the Lord and you must trust in him to be saved.
4. Why is the Bible important to and authoritative for Christians
even though it is such an old book
The Bible is important to Christians because they believe that in
the Bible, God reveals himself to people. He does this so that we
can have a personal relationship with him and follow his ways.
Christians place themselves under the Bible's authority. They believe
that it does not matter that the Bible is an old book because it is a
mistake to assume that it is not valuable or reliable just because it is
old. Believing that we are necessarily smarter or more enlightened
than the people who came before us is chronological snobbery.
CHAPTER 1 19
XiV
I UNDERS ANDING THE LESSONS


<!-- page-2 (book p.1) -->

Chapter 1 Syllabus
Lesson
WATCH
REVIEW FOR
STUDY FOR
GIVE
Assignment
Chapter 1.1-1.2
Questions for Chapter 1.1-1.2
Questions for Chapter 1.1-1.2
Activity: Curious About...
Chapter 1.3-1.4
Questions for Chapter 1.3-1.4
Questions for Chapter 1.3-1.4
Activity: Bible Scavenger Hunt
Chapter 1.5-1.6
Questions for Chapter 1.5-1.6
Questions for Chapter 1.5-1.6
Activity: Producer's List
Chapter 1.7-1.8
Questions for Chapter 1.7-1.8
Questions for Chapter 1.7-1.8
Activity: Beliefs and Behavior Brainstorm
Chapter 1.9-1.10
Questions for Chapter 1.9-1.10
Questions for Chapter 1.9-1.10
Activity: Being a Christian
Activity: Mapmaking
Videos
Video Questions
Video Questions
Activity: Quiz Cards
Study Guide Questions
Chapter 2.1-2.2
Questions for Chapter 2.1-2.2
*Student Textbook (ST) Student Manual (SM)
A full-year syllabus is available in the online resources.
2 | CHAPTER 1
Page
ST 4-7
SM 6-7
4-5
ST 7-9
SM 8-9
6-7
ST 9-11
SM 10-11
ST 12-13
SM 12-13
10-11
ST 14-16
SM 14-15
SM 16-18
15-17
SM 21-23
19-21
ST 17-20
SM 26
Chapter 1
OVERVIEW
Finding directions for life so we can act
with purpose and meaning is not easy. A
worldview helps us make sense of reality
and guides our decisions and actions.
Summit Ministries believes that the
Christian worldview best explains the world.
Foundations is the first textbook in a four-
book series that introduces the Christian
worldview to high schoolers and teaches
what it means to be a Christian.
The Bible plays a central role in
shaping our thoughts, values, and behavior.
Christians place themselves under its
authority because in it, God reveals himself
to humanity. The Bible tells an overarching
story that helps us make sense of all our
individual stories. It starts with Act 1, which
is creation. Act 2 tells what happened with
the fall of humans in rebellion against
God. Act 3 begins when God initiates
our redemption, choosing one family that
would become the nation of Israel. This
nation would prepare the way for Act 4,
when Jesus comes to Earth to accomplish
our redemption through his death and
resurrection. Restoration is initiated in Act 5
as God reigns in the lives of Jesus' followers,
who become the church. We look forward
to Act 6, when God's kingdom will be fully
implemented in a new heaven and a new
earth.
God's plan includes a role for us. In
living out the Christian worldview, it is
vital to understand not only what the Bible
says, but who God is, who we are, and how
we can participate in what God is doing
in the world. The goal of the Christian life
is to become like Christ. Our study will
include discussion of personal and corporate
disciplines that the Holy Spirit uses to help
us grow and to empower us to show God's
love to the world.
PREPARATION
Lesson 1:
Obtain one index card for each
student.
Lesson 2:
Print copies of TR 1.2A Bible
Scavenger Hunt for use by each
group of four or five students; also
print a copy of the answer key for
yourself.
Lesson 3:
Obtain a die; if you have more than
eight students, obtain two or three
dice.
Lesson 5:
Print a copy of TR 1.5A Being a
Christian for each pair of students.
Lesson 6:
Preview PS 1.6A Mapmaking to
become familiar with the activity.
Obtain one poster board, sticky
notes, and markers for each group
of four or five students.
Access and preview the videos
listed on Lesson 7. See the inside
back cover of this manual for
video-streaming instructions.
Lesson 8:
Obtain three index cards for each
student.
Lesson 10:
Print a copy of TR 1.10A Chapter 1
Test for each student.
LESSON MATERIALS
Presentation Slides
PS 1.6A Mapmaking
PS 1.8A Chapter 1 Review
Teacher Resources
TR 1.2A Bible Scavenger Hunt
TR 1.5A Being a Christian
TR 1.10A Chapter 1 Test
CHAPTER 1 | 3


<!-- page-3 -->

CH
Lesson 1:
1.1-1.2 P
Have students turn to page 4 in
their student textbook. Read the
objectives. Have students read
Chapter 1.1-1.2 silently or take
turns reading aloud, and then
answer the Discussion Questions
on pages 6-7 in their student
manual. Go over the answers in
class. Have students turn to the
Activity: Curious About ... in
their student manual. Assign the
homework.
describe what a worldview
is and give examples of
worldviews observed in the
world today. [1.1]
• Students will be able to explain
what it means to be Christian,
as well as three common
misconceptions about being a
Christian. [1.2]
4 CHAPTER 1
Note: Most of the questions in this chapter are intended to be
reflective. The goal is not for students to get the correct answers,
but to get them thinking through what they actually believe. The
answers to some of these questions may be a genuine, "I have no
idea." That's fine for now. Hopefully, classroom discussion will give
students the opportunity to ask questions, express doubts, and
learn to articulate what they believe and know about the Bible and
Christianity. Future chapters will contain a more balanced mix
of questions for content review, personal reflection, and critical
thinking.
1. How do people find directions for life and answers to life's
biggest questions? [1.1]
Answers will vary but may include that people receive directions
for life and answers to life's biggest questions from their parents,
teachers, and friends. Students may also say people find direction
through their experiences, by making mistakes and trying new ways
of doing things, and from their culture.
2. What is a worldview? [1.1]
A worldview is a pattern of ideas and beliefs that helps us make sense
of the world and guides our decisions and actions. A worldview is
like a lens through which we see the world. It helps us understand
the world we live in and provides answers to life's biggest questions.
3. How would you describe your worldview? [1.1]
Answers will vary. Students may refer to the worldviews listed in this
section (Christianity, Islam, secularism, Marxism, new spirituality,
and postmodernism.
4. Before reading Chapter 1.2, what did you think being
a Christian meant? Can you relate to any of the three
misconceptions discussed there? Explain. [1.2]
Answers will vary. Students are likely to say they relate to, or have
heard of, the three misconceptions discussed in Chapter 1.2.
5. What does it mean to be a Christian according to the Bible?
[1.2]
A Christian is a follower of Jesus Christ the Messiah. Christians
believe that Jesus is Lord and God; they trust him for forgiveness
and salvation, and they commit to following his ways.
6. What does Chapter 1.2 say that Christians believe about Jesus? [1.2]
It says that Christians believe that Jesus is not just a good moral teacher but that
he is God himself and that what he said about himself was true. They believe
that he not only died on a cross but rose again, and that he did this to save us
from sin and give us eternal life. Christians also believe that Jesus told them to
spread news about him to all the world.
CURIOUS ABOUT..
Students will express,
1. Distribute one index card to each student. Invite
expand, and clarify their
students to reflect on the ideas shared in the class
personal ideas about Jesus,
discussion questions.
Christianity, the Bible, and
2. Direct students to write a brief response to the
worldview.
following question on the front of their card: "What
is something from our class discussion that stirred
• Materials needed: index
cards and pen
10-15 minutes
your curiosity?" Their response can be about Jesus,
Christianity, the Bible, or worldview. Allow students
time to write their response.
3. When students have finished writing, ask them to turn
their index card over and write a brief response to the
following question: "What is something you would
like or hope to learn more about in this class?" Allow
students time to write their response.
4. Continue until students have finished writing. If time
permits, direct students to find a partner. Give pairs
time to share their responses with each other.
5. Students may keep their card, or they may turn it in to
you for review at the end of this course.
CHAPTER 1 | 5


<!-- page-4 (book p.1) -->

CH
Lesson 2:
1.3-1.4 ₽
for Chapter 1.3-1.4. Have
students turn to Activity: Bible
Scavenger Hunt in their student
manual. Have copies of TR 1.2A
Bible Scavenger Hunt available
for students and a copy of the
answer key for yourself. Read the
© Students will be able to
articulate why the Bible is
foundational for Christians.
[1.3]
• Students will be able to explain
two common mistakes that
people make in reading the
Bible. [1.4]
| CHAPTER 1
1. What is the Bible? How would you describe it in your own
words? [1.3]
The Bible is the written record of God's revelation. God reveals
himself in Scripture so we can be in a relationship with him. Though
it was not written directly to us, the Bible was written for us so we
can know God and discern his will. The 66 books and letters in the
Scriptures were inspired by God and written by many authors over
time to collectively tell God's great story of the world and our place
in it.
2. Do you think that an idea should be dismissed simply because
it is old? Why or why not? [1.3]
Possible answer: Convinced that humans are continually progressing,
many people assume that modern ideas are necessarily more accurate
and enlightened than ideas from the past. For this reason, it is often
argued that the Bible is outdated and irrelevant to modern life. To
think in this way is to fall into the trap of chronological snobbery.
New ideas are not always more accurate than old ones, and old ideas
have changed countless lives for the good and are just as likely to be
reliable as new ideas. However, in the end, the truth of an idea is not
determined by its age. Other factors must be considered.
3. What is proof texting, and how can this Bible-reading mistake
be avoided? [1.4]
Proof texting means ignoring the context and storyline of the Bible,
and picking out verses, or portions of verses, to support one's own
ideas. Determining what the Bible says on a specific topic does not
just involve gathering all the verses on the topic but understanding
what they say in the context of the Scriptures. While it is important
to listen to what the Bible has to say across numerous verses, we
must be careful not to cherry-pick verses to suit our own purposes
or force the Bible to say what we want it to say. Approach the Bible
with an open mind and humble attitude, ready to learn from it.
4. Why is it a mistake to make pursuing the Bible our end goal?
[1.4]
When we pursue the Bible as the end goal over God, we forget
that the authority of the Bible comes from God and then tend
to use it incorrectly as a weapon to threaten others or push them
into submission. Ironically, when the Bible is used in this way, it
functions in a lower place of authority since the person using it often
makes the Bible serve their own personal agenda. We turn the Bible
into a rule book and apply it with a rigid acceptance of whatever the
Bible says without paying attention to context or considering how
we might wisely apply the Bible in our own lives.
5. What does it mean to call the Bible a story? How do you react to the idea
that the Bible is a story? [1.4]
Answers will vary. For some students, calling the Bible a story might be
confusing since they tend to associate stories with fiction. However, in calling
the Bible a story, we are not saying that it is made up or not true. Instead, we
are saying that though the Bible has many diverse books composed of narratives,
poetry, and more, together they all tell one great story a true story-about
God and the world.
BIBLE SCAVENGER HUNT
Students will use the Bible
to find the answers to Bible-
1. Have students work in groups of four or five.
2. Inform groups that they will race against each other
related questions.
to compete in a scavenger hunt. Distribute a copy of
• Materials needed: TR 1.2A,
Bible, and pen
TR 1.2A Bible Scavenger Hunt to each group. Have
students decide on a name for their group and write it
at the top of TR 1.2A.
3. Allow time for groups to use the Bible to find the
answers to the questions. Note which groups compete
in the hunt in the time available and who finishes
first. Then, use the answer key to check the answers
with the class. Determine which group had the most
answers correct. If groups are tied, the group that
finished first wins.
CHAPTER 1 | 7


<!-- page-5 -->

CH
Lesson 3:
1.5-1.6 P
for Chapter 1.5-1.6. Retrieve
the die and have students turn
to Activity: Producer's List in
their student manual. Read the
• Students will be able to briefly
describe what happened in
the first three acts and the
interlude of the biblical story.
[1.5]
summarize the final three acts
of the biblical story. [1.6]
8 CHAPTER 1
1. What has been your experience of reading the Bible? Do
you find it uplifting? Encouraging? Confusing? Frustrating?
Something else? Explain. [1.5]
2. Describe what happened in the first two acts of the biblical
story. [1.5]
In Act 1: Creation, the Bible says God created the world out of
nothing in six days; that he created all living things, including
human beings; and that he rested on the seventh day. In Act 2: The
Fall, a serpent tempts human beings to disobey God. They eat the
fruit of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil. As a consequence
of their sin, the harmonious relationships they had are broken and
violence spreads on the earth.
3. Describe what happened in the third act and interlude of the
biblical story. [1.5]
In Act 3: Israel—Redemption Initiated, God chose the family of
Abraham to bless the whole world, and his descendants became the
nation of Israel. In the Interlude: the Second Temple Period, the
Israelites, who were scattered and waiting for God's redemption, had
to wait 400 years before God sent new revelation.
4. In what act of the biblical story did Jesus appear? Who was he,
and what did he do? [1.6]
Jesus appeared in Act 4: Redemption Accomplished. Jesus was
a human being who was one of Abraham's descendants, but he
was also God in the flesh and Israel's long-awaited Messiah. Jesus
preached, healed people, and worked miracles. Then, he died on
a cross, rose from the grave after three days, and later ascended to
heaven.
5. Describe what happened in Act 5: Restoration Initiated. [1.6]
After Jesus ascended to heaven, the Holy Spirit came to empower
Jesus' disciples. They began to spread the good news of the
resurrection and the coming kingdom of God. As people believed
their message, the church was born and grew. The church continues
to proclaim the good news of salvation, hope, and healing for all
creation.
6. What will happen in Act 6: Restoration Accomplished? How
does the grand story of Scripture end? [1.6]
In Act 6: Restoration Accomplished, Jesus will return to judge the
world. After that, God's kingdom will be fully implemented, and evil
will be banished forever.
PRODUCER'S LIST
Students will associate
items related to the acts of
the biblical story.
• Materials needed: die or
dice
20-25 minutes
1. On the board, write the number and name of the six
acts.
2. Have the class sit in a circle. If your class is larger than
eight students, make two or more circles as desired.
3. Select a student to begin the activity and give him or
her the die. Have that student roll the die and say, "l
am the producer of a Bible drama." The number rolled
will determine which act he or she will use in the next
sentence: "In my show, for Act
→ I will
need
_" To complete the second part
of the sentence, the student should name an object,
person, or concept related to the act. For example, "l
am the producer of a Bible drama. In my show, for Act
2, I need an apple."
4. The next student to play is the one to the right of
the first student. Students will take turns around the
circle. Each subsequent person repeats what was
stated by the previous person, rolls the die, and adds
an additional act and item. For example, "I am the
producer of a Bible drama. In my show, for Act 2, l
need an apple. For Act 1, I need darkness" and so on.
5. If a student makes a mistake on an act or an item, that
student is out of the game.
6. Continue the game as long as desired or until there is
only one player left in the circle.
CHAPTER 1 | 9


<!-- page-6 -->

CH
Lesson 4:
1.7-1.8
for Chapter 1.7-1.8. Have
students turn to Activity: Beliefs
and Behavior Brainstorm in
their student manual. Read the
• Students will be able to discuss
the importance of knowing
God and ourselves. [1.7]
conclude how becoming like
Christ is a lifelong process.
[1.8]
| CHAPTER 1
1. Why do you think Proverbs 9:10 says, "The fear of the LORD
is the beginning of wisdom, and the knowledge of the Holy
One is insight"? [1.7]
Answers will vary but may include that the Bible encourages people
to pursue God because God is the source of truth.
2. When you think about God, what comes to mind? What is
God like? [1.7]
3. What do you think it means that God is called the Trinity?
[1.7]
Answers will vary but may include that God the Father, God the
Son, and God the Holy Spirit are three Persons who are all one God.
4. Think about where you find your identity. What makes you
who you are? [1.7]
Possible answers may include that we are God's beloved children,
made in his image. Answers may also refer to our genes; our family,
upbringing, and culture; our skills and abilities; and our choices and
habits.
5. How does our behavior influence our beliefs? [1.8]
While our beliefs can have a strong impact on our behavior, just
because we believe something to be true does not mean that we
will live according to that truth. In fact, if we want to indulge a
particular behavior that goes against our current beliefs, we may shed
those beliefs in order to find a system of belief that allows us to keep
on doing whatever we like.
6. Why do Christians teach that pornography is wrong? [1.8]
Christians teach that pornography is wrong because it treats people
as objects rather than as human beings who are made in God's image
and worthy of respect.
7. Why do Christians engage in spiritual disciplines? [1.8]
Answers will vary but may include that such practices are helpful to believers
as they seek to follow Christ. In other instances, believers were taught these
practices and expected to do them.
otacda
OLI-01
BELIEFS AND BEHAVIOR BRAINSTORM
Students will assess how
1. On the board, draw a T-chart. On the left side, write
beliefs affect behavior
and how behavior affects
the heading Beliefs Affect Behavior, and on the right
beliefs.
side, Behavior Affects Beliefs. Explain to students they
will brainstorm examples for each side of the chart.
2. Discuss the following two examples with students. On
• Materials needed: none
the left side of the chart, write trust fall. Ask students
if they have ever participated in such an activity and
how their beliefs helped or hindered them in it. On
the right side of the chart, write gratitude journal. Ask
students if they have ever kept a gratitude journal
and whether doing so changed their attitude (their
beliefs about whether they were blessed or not). Note
that examples do not have to be limited to one's own
behavior and beliefs. Sometimes observing others'
behavior impacts our beliefs-for example, in a
game where you are trying to decide who is bluffing.
And sometimes others' beliefs affect our behavior-
for example, when a competitor thinks you are a
formidable opponent so, to reinforce their belief, you
act more confidently than you really feel.
3. Begin with the left side. Have students brainstorm
examples that show beliefs affect behavior and write
them on the chart.
4. Continue with the right side, brainstorming examples
that show behavior affects beliefs. Write them on the
chart.
CHAPTER 1 | 11
G Introduction


<!-- page-7 -->

CH
Lesson 5:
1.9-1.10 P
Read the objective to the class.
for Chapter 1.9-1.10. Have
students turn to Activity: Being
a Christian in their student
manual. Read the directions.
Distribute TR 1.5A Being
a Christian to each pair of
students.
OBJECTIVE
© Students will be able to express
why love is a Christian's
primary calling. [1.9]
1. Imagine for a moment that you are not a Christian. What
do you think would make it difficult for you to become a
Christian? What would bother you about Christianity? [1.9]
Answers will vary. One of the most common turnoffs to Christianity
is sadly Christians themselves. When Christians are critical, rude,
and unloving, it makes it hard for other people to want to become
Christians themselves. It might also be difficult for some to become
Christians because they perceive Christianity as irrelevant to life.
2. Why shouldn't Christianity be judged solely by our
experiences with Christians? [1.9]
Our experience of Christians is important. If there is no love
among Christians, then something is wrong, However, becoming
a Christian does not cure us of sin. Those who have trusted Jesus
as their Savior are no longer bound by sin, but they must still learn
how to say no to sin, and this is a lifelong process. No Christian
is perfect in this life. We should not blame Christianity when
Christians live in ways that are entirely opposed to the teachings of
Jesus.
3. Some people think that loving others requires that you accept
whatever they do as right and even good for them. Do you
believe this? Why or why not? [1.9]
4. How would you describe God's love for us and the love that
Christians are called to demonstrate? [1.9]
Possible answer: God's love is totally self-giving, and it is most clearly
displayed in Jesus' death on the cross for us. Christians are called
to demonstrate that same love by respecting, serving, and giving of
themselves to others.
5. Your textbook says that it is written from a Protestant
perspective. What do you understand this to mean? [1.10]
Answers will vary but may include that the book is not written from
a Catholic or Orthodox point of view.
6. Chapter 1.10 offers four suggestions for beginning the journey
through this book. The first of these is to "think about where
you are in relationship to the Christian faith." How would you
respond to that statement? [1.10]
12 | CHAPTER 1
BEING A CHRISTIAN
Students will discuss
1. Have students work in pairs. Distribute a copy of
quotations about being a
TR 1.5A Being a Christian to each pair.
Christian and relate them
to the misconceptions
2. Have partners discuss the quotations and relate them
described in the textbook.
to the misconceptions described in Chapter 1.2.
3. Have students share their responses to specific
quotes.
• Materials needed: TR 1.5A
CHAPTER 1 | 13
G Introduction


<!-- page-8 -->

CH
Lesson 6:
P
Use PS 1.6A Mapmaking to lead
students through the activity.
OBJECTIVE
• Students will organize concepts
from the lesson by creating
visual maps.
PREPARATION
• Materials needed: PS 1.6A,
poster board, sticky notes,
markers, pen, and paper
O Time required: 45-50 minutes
Christianity
14 | CHAPTER 1
MAPMAKING
1. Display PS 1.6A Mapmaking and read all of the
slides.
2. Inform students that they will work in groups
of four or five to create a map of the Christian
worldview. The map may be a geographical map or
a mind map.
3. Provide each group with poster board, sticky
notes, and markers to design their maps. Have
students use pen and paper as needed to take
notes as they brainstorm what their group will do.
4. Give groups the following instructions:
a. All members of the group must agree on the
type of map they will create to portray the
Christian worldview.
b. If a group decides to portray the Christian
worldview with a geographical map, the map
must include the title, direction, legend, scale,
and labels.
c. If a group decides to portray the Christian
worldview as a mind map, the map must
include a title and labels. Clearly identify the
relative importance and relationship of the
ideas pictured on the map.
d. Groups must be prepared to explain their maps.
5. Allow groups time to discuss the assignment and
create their maps.
6. Have groups take turns presenting and explaining
their maps to the class.
7. As time allows, discuss the differences and
similarities of the maps and have students offer
their thoughts on the activity.
Videos P
In this lesson, students will view
six videos featuring Christian
educators and authors. Each
expert answers a specific
worldview or apologetics
question. These videos will
allow students to expand their
knowledge and provide biblical
answers to thought-provoking
questions. The following videos
will be used in today's lesson:
1. What Is a Worldview, and Why
Does It Matter? (Myers, 1:38)
2. How Can Christians Become
More Intentional about Their
Worldview? (Stonestreet, 1:28)
3. How Should We Begin
Studying Worldview? (Sherrard,
2:02)
4. Is Christianity Just a List of
Rules to Follow? (Myers, 1:59)
5. How Can We Overcome
Apathy toward Christianity?
(Wallace, 3:07)
6. How Can Christians Portray
the Fulfilling Life Jesus Gives?
(Heard, 3:15)
Play the videos one at a time in
the order listed above. Before each
video, direct students to read the
questions associated with that
video in their student manual
so they know what to listen for.
During and after the video has
been shown, students should write
their answers to the Discussion
Questions. It may be necessary to
play the video again so students
can answer all the questions.
Go over the questions for the
first video. Play the next video.
Continue in this manner until the
last video has been played and all
questions have been discussed.
•video 1:
What Is a Worldview, and Why Does It Matter?
1. How does the speaker describe what a worldview is?
A worldview is a set of ideas and beliefs that guide our decisions
and actions. It says something about our relationship to God and
everyone else. Worldviews include what someone believes about God
and reality. Worldviews can be understood in terms of patterns.
2. How do ideas about God and reality impact morals and
behaviors?
Ideas have consequences. They influence what we think is right or
wrong. Ideas we personally hold become beliefs that shape the course
of our lives.
3. What is one of the most important things that Christians can
do with worldview patterns?
One of the most important things that Christians can do is hold up
the patterns they see in their own worldview or in the worldviews of
others in comparison to Scripture.
•
Video 2:
How Can Christians Become More Intentional about Their
Worldview?
1. How is secularism most powerful in its challenges to faith?
Secularism is not powerful in scrutinizing and disproving faith, but
in privatizing and dismissing it.
2. In what ways have Christians adopted a worldview of
secularism?
Many Christians talk about a personal relationship with Christ
but not about a biblical worldview. They do not engage in public
proclamation of the biblical message that Jesus Christ is Lord and
King. Faith gets reduced to a personal preference rather than a
personal commitment to the truth.
3. How should we view and talk about faith?
Christians must return to talking about faith as objective truth
rather than as a preference. Christianity deals with reality and not
merely feelings.
CHAPTER 1 | 15


<!-- page-9 -->

CH
Videos
(continued)
• Video 3
How Should We Begin Studying Worldview?
1. How can you decide what apologetics resources to read?
Read what the apologists or experts you respect are reading. In the case of
Christian apologists, they can often be approached and asked directly what
books they recommend.
2. What is the best way to learn worldview?
The best way is to study in community. Start with an area you enjoy, and then
study with a friend or someone else you respect. You can help each other stay
motivated to see it through.
3. How can you avoid being overwhelmed by the resources out there?
Just start somewhere. There's no perfect starting point. The important thing is to
get started. Pick something you find interesting and invite a friend to join you.
• Video 4:
Is Christianity Just a List of Rules to Follow?
1. What suspicion did the speaker say he had when he was younger? Do you
agree or disagree with that suspicion? Why or why not?
The speaker said he suspected that religion was the way powerful people kept
everybody else in line. Reasons given by students in favor of or against this
suspicion will vary.
2. What does the speaker say about whether Christianity is a religion or a
relationship?
The speaker says Christianity is about relationship because Jesus is relational and
human beings have a relationship with him. Christianity is a religion because it
is an explanation of the cause, purpose, and meaning of the universe.
3. What does the speaker say makes Christianity different from other
religions and philosophies?
The speaker says Christianity is different from other religions and philosophies
because it does not aim to make Christians follow people who are powerful but
instead seeks to set them free. Other religions are like looking through a keyhole,
but Christianity is like having Jesus open the door.
4. What problems and questions are answered in or through Jesus?
According to the speaker, Jesus came into the world as the answer to the
problem of pain. He also helps us know whether anything is real, whether we
can know truth, how we should live our lives, and what our purpose in living is.
Video 5:
How Can We Overcome Apathy toward Christianity?
1. What worldviews does the speaker say competed with Christianity where
he grew up? How did he describe them?
The speaker identified the competing worldviews as naturalism, the idea
that nothing supernatural exists and everything can be explained by science,
and apathy-ism, described as the worldview of people who are so focused on
entertainment and who believe nothing really matters.
2. To counter apathy, the speaker recommended two why questions for every
what in a conversation. Explain what he meant.
The speaker meant that in response to every proposition in a conversation, you
should respond by asking two questions starting with the word why. The first
why is used to ask the person why they believe that a specific idea proposed is
true. The second why is when you ask why that belief matters.
3. What two things did the speaker say people are interested in that
Christianity provides answers to?
The speaker said all people are interested in living longer or in eternity. He also
said that people want to have a purpose or meaning in life.
ideo 6:
How Can Christians Portray the Fulfilling Life Jesus Gives?
1. What misconception do people often have about the gospel? Why is it
wrong?
People often see the gospel as something to be preached rather than lived. This is
a problem because the gospel is supposed to affect every aspect of our lives.
2. The speaker said that the gospel "summons us to participate in a story
where we are no longer the star of our own story but find significance
outside of ourselves." What is your response to this statement?
3. Why does the speaker mention morality, culture, beauty, truth, goodness,
and justice?
The speaker mentions these things because he believes that the gospel should
transform our lives so as to make a difference in all these areas and not just on
Sunday mornings.
16 | CHAPTER 1
CHAPTER 1 | 17


<!-- page-10 (book p.1) -->

CH
Lesson 8:
and
Review P
Have students turn to Activity:
Quiz Cards in their student
manual. Read the directions.
Display PS 1.8A Chapter 1
Review to help students review
the chapter.
Foundations
18 | CHAPTER 1
QUIZ CARDS
Students will review the chapter by formulating
questions to quiz each other.
• Materials needed: index cards, student textbook,
and pen
• Time required: 20-30 minutes
1. Distribute three index cards to each student.
2. State that students must write a total of nine
questions-one question for each section from
Chapter 1.1-1.9. They should write three quiz
questions per card and write the answers for
those questions on the back. Students may use
the textbook in drafting their questions; they are
not allowed to use or copy questions from the
student manual.
3. Allow students up to 15 minutes to write their
questions and the answers.
4. Have students pair up to quiz each other. Then
have them change partners and repeat the
process.
Allow students to study for the
Chapter 1 Test. Have them turn
to the Study Guide in their
student manual and complete
the exercises.
Key Terms
worldview
Christian
Key Verses
Luke 18:22
Proverbs 9:10
1. How is a worldview like a map? Give examples of some
worldviews.
A worldview is like a map because a worldview is a pattern of ideas
and beliefs that helps us make sense of the world. A worldview helps
guide our decisions and actions. Examples of worldviews include
Christianity, Islam, secularism, Marxism, new spirituality, and
postmodernism. In the same way that having the wrong map can
cause you to get lost, having the wrong worldview can also have dire
consequences.
2. Explain why it is wrong to say that to be a Christian you have
to meet one of three conditions: you must be born into a
Christian family, you must follow certain rules, or you must
focus only on heaven.
It is wrong to say those things because they are misconceptions
about Christianity. A Christian is a person who follows Christ.
Even if you are not born into a Christian family, you can become
a Christian when you decide to follow Jesus. You do not become a
Christian by following a set of rules. Though Christians do try to
obey God's commands found in the Bible, they do not cease to be
Christians if they fail to obey them all. While focusing on heaven
is good, Christians are also supposed to care about the people Jesus
died to save. Christians have a responsibility to share the good news
with others to bring healing and hope to the world.
3. What do Christians believe about Jesus?
Christians believe that Jesus was more than a good teacher or a
spiritual sage. He was a human being who was without sin and lived
a blameless life. He was also God himself. He came to Israel, but he
was not the political leader that the Jews were expecting. He healed
people and taught them, and then he was crucified. He was dead for
three days and then he rose from the dead. He ascended to heaven
but will come to Earth one day to judge everyone. Jesus is the
Messiah. He is the Lord and you must trust in him to be saved.
4. Why is the Bible important to and authoritative for Christians
even though it is such an old book?
The Bible is important to Christians because they believe that in
the Bible, God reveals himself to people. He does this so that we
can have a personal relationship with him and follow his ways.
Christians place themselves under the Bible's authority. They believe
that it does not matter that the Bible is an old book because it is a
mistake to assume that it is not valuable or reliable just because it is
old. Believing that we are necessarily smarter or more enlightened
than the people who came before us is chronological snobbery.
CHAPTER 1 | 19


<!-- page-11 (book p.1) -->

CH
(continued)
5. Describe the Bible. What is it? How is it organized?
The Bible is a collection of 66 books and letters that tell the true story of God,
the world, and our place in the world. It has two parts. The first part is the Old
Testament and the second part is the New Testament. Each part has several
books in it. Each book is divided into chapters, and each chapter is divided into
portions called verses. The chapters and verses are all numbered.
6. What are two mistakes that people make in reading the Bible?
Two mistakes in reading the Bible are proof texting and making the Bible the
end goal. Proof texting is taking verses from the Bible and using them to prove
a particular point, without regard to their context or the storyline of the Bible.
When the Bible is our end goal, we forget to pursue God.
7. What are the first three acts of the biblical story, and where are they found
in the Bible? What is the interlude? Describe the acts and the interlude.
The first three acts of the biblical story are found in the Old Testament. They
are Act 1: Creation, Act 2: The Fall, and Act 3: Israel—Redemption Initiated.
Act 1 tells how God created the universe and everything in it, including human
beings, who are made in his image to multiply and fill the earth and to take care
of it. Act 2 tells how sin came into the world when human beings disobeyed
God by eating the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil. Act 3 tells
how God chose Abraham's family to bless the whole world. That family became
the nation of Israel. The interlude is a period of 400 years from the time the Old
Testament ended to the time that God gave new revelation.
8. What are the three final acts of the biblical story? Where are they found in
the Bible? Describe them.
The final three acts of the biblical story are found in the New Testament. They
are Act 4: Jesus-Redemption Accomplished, Act 5: The Church-Restoration
Initiated, and Act 6: New Creation-Restoration Accomplished. Act 4 tells how
Jesus came to Earth to announce the kingdom of God, die for our sins, and rise
again. Act 5 tells how the Holy Spirit came to empower Jesus disciples after
Jesus ascended to heaven so that they could proclaim the good news of God's
kingdom to all creation. Act 6 says that Jesus will return to judge the world.
After that, all things will be made new and God will reign forever.
9. Theology is the study of God. Anthropology is the study of human
beings. Why should we know God and know ourselves?
We should know God because he created us and has revealed himself to us so
that we might know and trust him. We learn about God in Scripture. Knowing
who God is and what he commands helps us to know how to live. The Bible also
gives us insight into knowing ourselves. We should know ourselves so that we
can imitate Jesus and become the people that God wants us to be, using our gifts
to love him and love others.
10. Why is becoming like Christ a lifelong process? What helps us to become like him?
Becoming like Christ is a lifelong process because we need to be transformed to be like
Jesus. Believing the right things about Jesus does not guarantee that we will act like him.
We must rely on the Holy Spirit's power to change our hearts, minds, and behavior.
Certain habits or spiritual disciplines (such as prayer, Bible reading, and giving) help us to
practice our faith. We also learn to imitate Jesus when we imitate others who also follow
him and who encourage and challenge us to grow.
11. What is a Christian's primary calling? Why?
A Christian's primary calling is to love. The Bible teaches that God is love, and Jesus
demonstrated this love by dying on the cross for our sins. As followers of Christ, we are
to imitate him in showing sacrificial love for others. We need to love other people in such
a way that we seek their good before our own. Unselfish love should be the hallmark of
individual believers and of the church.
12. Why are there Christians who are sinful or judgmental?
When a person decides to follow Christ, that person's sins are forgiven and sin no longer
has power over him or her. But that does not mean that he or she cannot sin again. Every
day, a Christian must decide whether or not to live a life in keeping with what Jesus taught.
13. What four things does your student textbook invite you to do in the conclusion to
Chapter 1?
The student textbook asks us to 1) think about where we are in relationship to the
Christian faith; 2) be open to learning new things and thinking about things in a different
way; 3) discuss what we are learning with our classmates; and 4) pray about what we are
learning.
14. Why does your student textbook promote the Christian worldview?
The authors of the textbook believe that the Christian worldview offers the best
explanation of reality. They also believe that Christianity helps people live life with
meaning and purpose. The book is written by Christians from a Protestant point of view.
15. Why does so much of the Bible focus on the story of the nation of Israel? Why is
Israel important?
Israel is important in the grand story of Scripture because God chose a single family
through which he would bless the whole world. That family was the family of Abraham; his
descendants became the nation of Israel. Jesus was one of Abraham's descendants, and his
story is the climax of Israel's story.
16. What does it mean to say that the church lives in an already, not yet time?
According to Chapter 1.6, it means that even though God has started the restoration of the
world, that restoration is not complete. God wants believers to proclaim the good news of
his kingdom to everyone. He wants the church to tell people how they can be forgiven of
their sins and find hope, healing, and new life in Jesus.
17. Read and study the two Key Verses listed at the top of the study guide.
20 | CHAPTER 1
CHAPTER 1 | 21


<!-- page-12 (book p.1) -->

CH
Lesson 10:
Chapter 1
Test P
Distribute TR 1.10A Chapter 1 Test to each student and allow
time for students to complete the exercises. Those who finish
early may start reading Chapter 2. Assign homework.
Notes
What the Bible
Is and Isn't
22 | CHAPTER 1
