# Chapter 2

<!-- page-1 (book p.1) -->

CH
Chapter 1
Test P
Distribute TR 1.10A Chapter 1 Test to each student and allow
time for students to complete the exercises. Those who finish
early may start reading Chapter 2. Assign homework.
Notes
What the Bible
Is and Isn't
22 | CHAPTER 1


<!-- page-2 -->

What the Bible
Is and Isn't
Chapter 2 Syllabus
Lesson
REVIEW
WATCH
REVIEW FOR
STUDY FOR
GIVE
Assignment
Chapter 1 Test
Questions for Chapter 2.1-2.2
Activity: What Do You Know?
Chapter 2.3-2.4
Questions for Chapter 2.3-2.4
Questions for Chapter 2.3-2.4
Activity: Not Just a Book of Instructions
Chapter 2.5-2.6
Questions for Chapter 2.5-2.6
Questions for Chapter 2.5-2.6
Activity: God's Revelation
Chapter 2.7-2.8
Questions for Chapter 2.7-2.8
Questions for Chapter 2.7-2.8
Activity: The Bible Is Rooted in History
Chapter 2.9-2.10
Questions for Chapter 2.9-2.10
Questions for Chapter 2.9-2.10
Activity: Why Truth Matters
Activity: Two Truths and One Opinion
Videos
Video Questions
Video Questions
Activity: The Bible Is the Word of God
Study Guide Questions
Chapter 3.1-3.2
Questions for Chapter 3.1-3.2
*Student Textbook (ST) Student Manual (SM)
A full-year syllabus is available in the online resources.
Page
ST 20-22
SM 28-29
28-29
ST 23-25
SM 30-31
ST 25-28
SM 32-33
ST 28-30
SM 34
SM 36-38
37-39
SM 41-43
41-43
ST 31-34
SM 46
24 | CHAPTER 2
Chapter 2
OVERVIEW
The Bible is the most significant book
ever written. It has greatly influenced and
shaped the world today. The Bible is part
of world literature; it has influenced our
great nation, and it has changed Western
civilization. However, people have different
ideas about what the Bible is and isn't.
The Bible is divided into two sections:
the Old Testament and the New Testament.
It consists of 66 books and letters written
by more than 40 authors over a period of
about 1,500 years. Some Bibles also include
a section called the Apocrypha, which is
a collection of books written during the
intertestamental period. Many people think
the Bible is just a list of rules to obey, but it
is much more than that! It tells us who God
is, what he has done, and what he is going
to do. Rather than a rule book, it's more
like an owner's manual for life. The Bible
can also be seen as a compass—a guide to
wise living in this fallen world. The two
types of revelation are general revelation
and specific revelation. Revelation describes
how God communicates with humans.
The 66 books of the Bible make up the
canon of Scripture. The Old Testament
canon was mostly established by the time
of Jesus. The New Testament was mostly
established by the second century. The
three criteria used to decide which books
would be part of the New Testament
canon were apostolicity, orthodoxy, and
pedigree. The Bible was inspired by the
Holy Spirit. All of Scripture is God's Word,
which is truth and doesn't change. These
are highly relevant facts considering the
popularity of relativism, which claims that
truth is relative to each individual person
or culture. The Bible is God's Word and is
truth for all people.
PREPARATION
Lesson 2:
Lesson 4:
Lesson 5:
Lesson 6:
Preview PS 2.2A Books of the Bible
to become familiar with how it
supports the Discussion Questions.
Provide access to computers.
Write one of each of the following
roles on separate sheets of paper:
a teen in a small village in Africa, a
famous actor, a liberal woman in NYC,
a teen in a Muslim country, and a teen
in a Christian school.
Obtain one handheld whiteboard,
marker, and eraser for each group of
three to five students. Pads of paper
may be used if whiteboards aren't
available. View PS 2.6A Two Truths
and One Opinion to become familiar
with the activity.
Access and preview the videos listed
on Lesson 7. See the inside back cover
of this manual for video streaming
instructions.
Make one copy of TR 2.10A Chapter 2
Test for each student.
LESSON MATERIALS
Presentation Slides
PS 2.2A Books of the Bible
PS 2.6A Two Truths and One Opinion
PS 2.8A Chapter 2 Review
Teacher Resources
TR 2.10A Chapter 2 Test
CHAPTER 2 25


<!-- page-3 (book p.2) -->

CH
Lesson 1:
2.1-2.2
Review Chapter 1 Test. Have
students turn to page 17 in
their student textbook. Read the
objectives to the class. Go over
the answers to the Discussion
Questions for Chapter 2.1-2.2
on page 26 in the student
manual. Have students turn to
Activity: What Do You Know?
in their student manual. Assign
the homework.
articulate four ways the Bible
has influenced the world.
[2.1]
identify and explain four
common ways people
approach and read the Bible
today. [2.2]
26 CHAPTER 2
1. List and describe four ways the Bible has influenced the world.
[2.1]
• The Bible is part of world literature. It is an eyewitness account of
historical events that have shaped the world. People from many
different countries have read the Bible.
• The Bible had a great influence on our nation. Many of our
founding fathers relied on the Bible. John Quincy Adams, who
was the sixth US president, wrote: "The Bible is the book [above]
all others, to be read at all ages, and in all conditions of human
life... every day."
• The Bible changed Western civilization. The Bible's moral guidance
influenced everything from the abolition of slavery, to freedom and
dignity for women, to the founding of hospitals and schools, to
the advancement of science and the development of great art and
architecture.
• Knowledge of the Bible is the mark of an educated person.
Everyone who has a thorough knowledge of the Bible may truly be
called educated.
2. Explain four common ways people approach and read the
Bible. [2.2]
The four ways people approach and read the Bible are the skeptic,
scholar, seeker, and saint. The skeptic approaches the Bible not sure
that what the Bible teaches is true or relevant. Some skeptics say the
Bible was written purely by humans. The scholar studies the Bible
deeply. The skeptical scholar handles the Bible as a human book of
great literary worth. The Christian scholar studies the Bible to learn
more about God, his creation, and how to live out the Christian
faith. The seeker reads the Bible looking for answers to life's big
questions. Some seekers view the Bible as a holy book, but not the
Holy Book. Other seekers are open to the idea that the Bible alone
is God's Word to humanity. The saint reads and studies the Bible
in order to understand it and apply it to life. Saints do not read the
Bible just for information, but to grow in a relationship with God.
3. Which of the four approaches do you currently use when
reading the Bible? Explain. [2.2]
4. Have you ever changed your approach to studying the Bible?
How? [2.2]
WHAT DO YOU KNOW?
Students will assess their
knowledge of the Bible and
compare their results to
those of surveys conducted
in the United States.
• Materials needed: paper
and pen
15-20 minutes
1. On a piece of paper, have students answer the following
Bible questions:
• Name the first five books of the Bible in the proper
order. (Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers,
Deuteronomy)
• Name the four Gospels. (Matthew, Mark, Luke, John)
• Is the Bible the literal and inspired Word of God?
(Answers will vary.)
2. Instruct students to check their papers as you read the
answers out loud. For the first two questions, write the
total number of correct responses on the whiteboard. For
the third question, write a total number of yes responses
and a total number of no responses. Have students work
together to calculate the class percentages of correct
responses for each question. Compare class response
percentages with the results of national surveys below:
• 43 percent of US respondents were able to correctly
identify the first five books of the Bible.!
• 45 percent of Americans could name all four Gospels.?
3. Discuss the observations made in the comparison.
4. For the third question, discuss the responses to a 2022
Gallup poll that says 20 percent of Americans believe
the Bible is the literal word of God vs. 49 percent say it is
inspired and 29 percent say it's fiction. How do the class
responses compare to the national responses? Inform
students that in this chapter they will study the evidence to
support the belief that the Bible is the literal and inspired
Word of God.
' A 2014 study by the National Association of Evangelicals says only 43% of Americans can name the first five books of the Bible.
https://www.nae.org/americans-and-the-bible/.
= A 2017 Pew Research article (1) referencing a 2010 study (2) says, "But fewer than half of adults (45%) could name all four Gospels
(Matthew, Mark, Luke and John), (1) https://www.pewresearch.org/short-reads/2017/04/14/5-facts-on-how-americans-view-the-
bible-and-other-religious-texts/.
* This 2022 Gallup study says 20% of Americans believe the Bible is the literal word of God (vs 49% say inspired and 29% say it's
fiction). https://news.gallup.com/poll/394262/fewer-bible-literal-word-god.aspx.
CHAPTER 2 | 27


<!-- page-4 (book p.29) -->

CH
Lesson 2:
2.3-2.4 p
Questions for Chapter 2.3-2.4.
Display PS 2.2A The Books of
the Bible as you discuss the first
question. Explain
that the five books
containing God's
Law are called the
Torah. The books
on prophecy
include the major
prophets and
minor prophets.
The New
Testament contains the Gospels,
the history of the carly church in
the book of Acts, letters written
by several of the apostles (the
author of Hebrews is unknown),
and the last book of the Bible,
which is a prophecy written by
the apostle John.
Not Just a Book of Instructions
in their student manual. Read
the directions. Have students
work in pairs. Assign the
homework.
© Students will be able to
describe the different
components of the Bible and
how it is arranged. [2.3]
© Students will be able to
explain why the Bible is like
a map and how it is like a
compass. [2.4]
28 | CHAPTER 2
1. Describe how the Bible is arranged, and explain each
component. [2.3]
The Bible contains 66 books. It is divided into two sections: the Old
Testament and the New Testament. The Old Testament contains
39 books of history, poetry, and prophecy. The New Testament
contains 27 books, including the Gospels, church history, letters,
and prophecy.
2. What is the Apocrypha, and why isn't it included in all Bibles?
[2.3]
The Apocrypha is Jewish literature written during the
intertestamental period and included in the Bible by some branches
of Christianity. The reason it isn't included in all Bibles is a matter
of debate. Protestant, Roman Catholic, Orthodox, and Coptic
churches vary on their views of the Apocrypha. Most Protestants
don't consider the Apocrypha to be authoritative.
3. Why is the Bible not like a rule book? [2.4]
While the Bible does include rules and instructions, it's much more
than that. The Bible is full of stories and poems and wisdom and
prophecy, which are about who God is and what he has done, is
doing, and will do in the world and for all eternity.
4. How is the Bible like a map? [2.4]
A good map will give you a sense of perspective so you can orient
yourself. It shows you the way to your intended destination and
helps you find the right path. The Bible shows you how to get your
bearings so you can find your way and live well in God's world,
enabling you to navigate the world with wisdom.
5. Describe how the Bible is like a compass. [2.4]
The Bible is like a compass because it offers a reference point outside
of yourself. Deviating from it, even a little, means the longer you
travel, the more lost you'll be. The Bible-compass analogy helps us
see God's Word less as a to-do list and more as a guide to wise living.
6. How do you see the Bible—like a rule book, a to-do list, a
map, a compass, or something else? Explain your answer. [2.4]
7. Why is the Bible a better compass than the books that other religions
view as holy? [2.4]
Many religions and philosophies offer direction. However, Christianity is a
revealed religion, not the product of human thought and speculation. It claims
the existence of a God who has the authority to speak into our lives. If the
Bible's revelation about God is accurate, then what it says is authoritative.
6 102298
NOT JUST A BOOK OF INSTRUCTIONS
Students will write a how-to
1. Have students choose a partner and work
guide for using the Bible in
together to write a how-to guide for using the
his or her life.
Bible in his or her life. Point out that students
need to include instructions for different
15-20 minutes
sections, such as the index and concordance.
2. Have each pair share their work with the class.
3. Discuss common themes that appeared among
the pairs and why.
CHAPTER 2 |


<!-- page-5 -->

CH
Lesson 3:
2.5-2.6
Questions for Chapter 2.5-2.6.
God's Revelation in their
student manual. Read the
directions. Have students work
independently. Then, complete
the activity as a class. Assign the
homework.
distinguish between general
and special revelation. [2.5]
determine how the canon of
Scripture was selected. [2.6]
describe the three criteria
used to select the books of
the New Testament. [2.6]
30 | CHAPTER 2
1. What does it mean to say that God is personal? [2.5]
God is personal because he has a mind, will, emotions, relational
ability, and self-consciousness. God created people for relationship
with himself. He wants to be known, therefore he must personally
reveal himself to us.
2. What does revelation mean? [2.5]
The word revelation means to make something known that was
previously unknown. The Hebrew word gald and the Greek word
apokalypto express the idea of uncovering what was concealed.
3. What are the two ways that God reveals his character? Explain
the difference between the two ways. Give an example of how
you have experienced each one personally. [2.5]
God has revealed his character through general and special
revelation. General revelation is God's universal revelation about
himself and morality from nature and our conscience. God's general
revelation is seen in creation and it is written on our hearts. Special
revelation is God's unique revelation about himself through Jesus
Christ, the Holy Spirit, the Scriptures, and miraculous events
(dreams, visions, prophecy).
Answers to the last question will vary.
4. What is the canon? How was the canon formed? [2.6]
The canon is the collection of biblical writings commonly
acknowledged as genuine and authoritative. The Old Testament
canon was mostly established by the time Jesus was on Earth. In the
first centuries of church history, certain books stood out to believers
as being divinely inspired and were chosen to be included in the
New Testament. The 66 books of the Bible make up the canon of
Scripture.
5. What three criteria were used to select the books of the New
Testament? What question does each criteria answer? [2.6]
• Apostolicity: Was the book written by an apostle or an associate of
an apostle?
• Orthodoxy: Did the book conform to the teachings of the apostles
and the theology in the writings of early church leaders?
• Pedigree: Was the book accepted early on in the life of the church
and by the majority of churches across the region?
GOD'S REVELATION
Students will write down
1. Review the definition and purpose of general
items from A-Z that reveal
revelation together as a class.
God's nature and character
2. Have students take a sheet of paper and write the
through general revelation.
letters of the alphabet down the side. Give them ten
minutes to write one item of creation that reveals
20-25 minutes
God's nature and character for each letter of the
alphabet, such as A: atom, B: baboon. Explain that
they will receive one point for each item they write
that no one else in the class wrote down.
3. At the end of ten minutes, have them stop writing.
4. Starting with A, have the students take turns calling
out what they wrote down. A student scores one point
for each unique answer. If more than one person
wrote the same thing, no one scores a point. Have
students justify an answer that might seem incorrect.
If the justification is deemed valid, the student scores
a point.
5. Continue this process as you work through the
alphabet.
6. Have students total their points. Reward the highest
scorer in some way.
7. Discuss what the students learned about God.
CHAPTER 2| 31


<!-- page-6 -->

CH
Lesson 4:
2.7-2.8 p
Questions for Chapter 2.7-2.8.
The Bible Is Rooted in History
in their student manual. Read the
directions. Have students work
independently or divide the class
into pairs or groups according
to how many computers are
available. Assign the homework.
O Students will be able to
explain why it is false to say
the Bible contains God's
words. [2.7]
• Students will be able to give
three reasons to be confident
that the entire Bible is God's
Word. [2.7]
• Students will be able
to express what the
correspondence theory of
truth is and how it relates to
the Bible. [2.8]
32 | CHAPTER 2
1. What is the difference between saying the Bible contains
God's words and the Bible is God's Word? [2.7]
To say the Bible merely contains God's words implies it contains
some other things too, perhaps even things that are not true. So
who decides which parts of the Bible are God's words and which are
not? Claiming the Bible contains God's words places the decision in
human hands, which means God's Word is what we say it is. If we
don't like something in the Bible, we can claim, "God would never
say or do that." To say the Bible is God's Word means it is God's
revelation. It helps us know and be in relationship with God.
2. What does inspiration mean, and how does it relate to the
Bible? [2.7]
Inspiration is the doctrine that God enabled people to write the
words of Scripture. The Bible is inspired by the Holy Spirit, who
motivated and inspired its authors to write it. The Holy Spirit spoke
through human beings to communicate God's revelation. More
than 3,000 times, the writers of the Bible claim to have received
messages from the Holy Spirit. They clearly believed they were led
by God's Spirit to write what they did.
3. Can the Bible be trusted as accurate? [2.7]
The Bible is rooted in history. It is based on actual events in history.
The truth of the Bible can be verified by historical evidence.
4. What does inerrancy mean, and how does it help us be
confident the Bible is God's Word? [2.7]
Inerrancy is the doctrine that the Bible is without error in the
original writings. The Bible isn't necessarily free of errors in
transmission. We know the essential doctrines of the faith have been
transmitted reliably and the best translations today will not mislead
us. The doctrine of inerrancy also says that the Bible is totally
trustworthy and reliable in all that it teaches.
5. What is the correspondence theory of truth? How does it
pertain to the Bible? [2.8]
The correspondence theory of truth says a belief, thought, or
statement is true if it corresponds to reality. The Bible implicitly
advances the correspondence view of truth-truth is what
corresponds to reality. The Bible claims truth about reality can be
known, even if we cannot have perfect knowledge. The Bible puts
a mirror up to our world and helps us see ourselves for who we
truly are.
FOUNDATIONS G
THE BIBLE IS ROOTED IN HISTORY
Students will support
how the Bible is rooted in
history.
computer, paper, and pen
20-30 minutes
1. Students should work individually, in pairs, or groups,
depending on how many computers are available.
2. Have students research to find two historical facts
from the Old Testament and two from the New
Testament that have scientifically been proven
accurate. Refer to possible answers as examples
below.
3. Direct students to record each historical fact, how
it was proven accurate, and the website where they
found the information.
4. If time permits, allow students to share some of their
historical facts.
Answer Samples
EXAMPLES OF HISTORICAL FACTS:
1. The Bible references King David on numerous occasions. There was no proof of the
existence of King David before 1993. Then, archeologists found proof of King David's
existence outside the Bible. A chunk of basalt was found at an ancient mound called
Tel Dan. It had words carved into it that were translated as "House of David" and
"King of Israel."
2. The story of the city of Jericho is found in Joshua 5-6. The city of Jericho was found
and excavated by archaeologists. They discovered that the walls tumbled in the exact
manner described in the Bible.
3. Proof that Jesus existed can be found in the writings (AD 115-117) of Tacitus, a Roman
historian. Tacitus was hostile to Christianity and had access to records about what
happened to Jesus Christ.
4. John 5:2-9 recounts Jesus healing an invalid next to the pool of Bethesda. John
described five colonnades (walkways) that led to the pool. Scholars believed that the
pool did not exist, until archaeologists found it forty feet below ground, and it had
five colonnades!
1. Hunter, Margaret. "15 Historical Proofs of the Bible." Amazing Bible Timeline with World History. April 29, 2013. https://
amazingbibletimeline.com/blog/q9_historical_proof_bible/.
2. Windle, Bryan. "Biblical Sites; Three Discoveries at Jericho," Bible Archaeology Reparz. May 25, 2019. htrps://
biblearchacologyreport.com/2019/05/25/biblical-sites-three-discoveries-at-jericho/.
3. Hunter, Margaret. "15 Historical Proofs of the Bible." Amazing Bible Timeline with World History. April 29, 2013. htrps://
amazingbibletimeline.com/blog/q9_historical_proof_bible/.
4. "The Bethesda Pool, Site of One of Jesus' Miracles," Biblical Archacology Society. August 13, 2023. https://www.
biblicalarchacology.org/daily/biblical-sites-places/jerusalem/the-bethesda-pool-site-of-one-of-jesus-miraclesl.
CHAPTER 2 33


<!-- page-7 (book p.2) -->

CH
Lesson 5:
2.9-2.10 p
Read the objective for Chapter
2.9. Go over the Discussion
Questions for Chapter 2.9-2.10.
Why Truth Matters in their
student manual. Read the
directions. Have the papers with
roles written on them available.
Have students complete the
activity.
OBJECTIVE
• Students will be able to explain
why relativism is a false belief
and why truth matters. [2.9]
34 | CHAPTER 2
1. What is relativism? Describe why relativism is a false belief.
[2.9]
Relativism is the belief that truth, knowledge, or morality is
relative to the individual, society, or historical context. Relativism
is a false belief because it is not based on facts and there are many
contradictions. If everyone can have their own truth, how do we
know what is really true? The Bible, however, gives us God's absolute
truth. There is no contradiction or question about what is true.
2. Relativism implies there is no truth because truth is relative to
the individual. Explain why the statement "There is no truth"
is a self-refuting claim. [2.9]
If there really is no truth, then this statement is false, because there
would be at least one truth, namely, that there is no truth. The
statement contradicts itself and therefore can't be true.
3. Why does truth matter? [2.9]
If there were no truth, we would be lost. Everyone would do what
they wanted, which would lead to chaos and people getting hurt.
Truth offers us a guide. It tells us who we are, where we came from,
where we are now, who we belong to, and the real story of our lives.
4. What is the purpose of the Bible? [2.10]
The Bible is God's revelation. He speaks to us through his inspired
Word. It tells us God is our Creator, and we are accountable to him.
The Bible calls us to examine our lives and the relationship we have
with God. It tells us who we are, who God is, and what God expects
of us.
FOUNDATIONS 5
WHY TRUTH MATTERS
Students will give examples
1. Students should gather in five groups. Give each
of relativism and evaluate
group one of the previously prepared papers with
whether they are objective
each of the following roles: a teen in a small village in
or subjective truth claims.
Africa, a famous actor, a liberal woman in NYC, a teen in
a Muslim country, and a teen in a Christian school.
20-30 minutes
2. Then, assign each group a different topic such as
cheating, stealing, or doing drugs. Explain that each
group will work together to assume the role on the
paper and respond with how their character would
apply relativism to the topic.
3. Remind students that an objective truth claim is a
claim that does not depend on one's belief. It is based
on facts. A subjective truth claim is a claim based on
the idea that truth changes according to one's belief. It
is based on feelings or opinions instead of facts.
4. Choose one group to give its response and ask the
other groups what the Bible says is the objective truth
claim about the topic. Then have them explain why
their topic is not a subjective truth claim.
5. Continue this process with the other four groups.
CHAPTER 2 35


<!-- page-8 -->

CH
Lesson 6:
Use PS 2.6A Two Truths and
One Opinion to lead students
through the activity.
OBJECTIVE
differentiate truth from
relativism. They will also be
able to explain the value of
recognizing truth and the
challenges of relativism.
PREPARATION
• Materials needed: PS 2.6A,
one handheld whiteboard (or
pad of paper), marker, and
eraser for each group of three
to five students
40-45 minutes
Two Truths and One Opinion
Belabery be ele our lie dat
36 | CHAPTER 2
TWO TRUTHS AND ONE OPINION
1. Divide the class into groups of three to five. Give each group
a handheld whiteboard, marker, and eraser. Ask the group
to designate a secretary to write answers on the whiteboard,
and a spokesperson to explain their group's consensus.
2. Inform students that they are going to play a game that
will deepen their understanding of truth, opinion, and the
challenges of relativism. Display PS 2.6A Two Truths and
One Opinion. Read slide 1.
3. Explain how to play the game. Each slide will contain
two truths and one opinion. Groups will work together
to evaluate the statements and determine which two
statements are truth and which statement is an opinion.
In each group, the secretary should label the whiteboard
A, B, and C. When the group decides on their answer, the
secretary will write a T for truth and an O for opinion by
each of the letters. Groups should keep their answers
concealed until called upon.
4. Show slides 2 and 3. Have volunteers read the definitions of
truth and opinion.
5. Show slide 4. Explain that you will read each statement
aloud. Students in each group will discuss and decide
which two statements are truth and which statement is
an opinion. Groups will have 60 seconds (for each slide) to
write their answers on their whiteboard.
6. Call on each group to share its response. Show slide 5. If
a group has an answer that differs from the answer slide,
take a moment to let the group spokesperson say why
their group chose that answer. Discuss their answer as a
class to clarify truth. Give a point to each group with the
right answers.
7. Discuss the value of recognizing truth and the challenges
of relativism. On each question slide, take the opportunity
to discuss the value of believing the biblical truths and the
danger of believing that an opinion is a truth. Ask questions
such as:
• How would believing this truth help someone have
stronger character?
• What could be the possible outcome if someone
believed this opinion is really a truth?
• What difference will believing this truth make in your
life?
• What would be a possible outcome if someone did not
know this is a truth?
• How do you know this is truth?
• How do you know this is not truth?
8. Continue the process with the remaining slides. Reward the
group that has the most points.
Videos P
In this lesson, students will
view four interviews of various
Christian educators and authors.
Each expert answers a specific
worldview or apologetics
question. These videos will
allow students to expand their
knowledge and provide biblical
answers to thought-provoking
questions. The following videos
will be used in today's lesson:
1. How Did We Get the Bible?
(Wallace, 3:37)
2. Is the Bible Applicable?
(Shlemon, 4:34)
3. Is the Bible's Impact
Important? (Schlemon, 1:59)
4. Isn't Christianity a Bunch
of Rules and Regulations?
(Schlemon, 3:28)
Play the videos one at a time in
the order listed above. Before each
video, direct students to read the
questions associated with that
video in their student manual
so they know what to listen for.
During and after the video has
been shown, students should write
their answers to the Discussion
Questions. It may be necessary to
play the video again so students
can answer all the questions.
Go over the questions for the
first video. Play the next video.
Continue in this manner until
the last video has been played and
questions have been discussed.
Video 1:
How Did We Get the Bible?
1. Explain the first criterion discussed by the speaker that was
used for determining whether a document was included in the
New Testament.
The first criterion was eyewitness testimony. Did someone see the
event, or did someone have access to an eyewitness who wrote down
what he or she saw?
2. Who were two writers of New Testament books that were not
eyewitnesses?
Mark got his information firsthand from Peter, who was an
eyewitness. Luke had access to all the eyewitnesses and servants of
the Word. However, Luke was an eyewitness to the events in the
book of Acts.
3. Early followers of Jesus, such as Ignatius, Papias, and Polycarp
who were students of John, quoted from the Gospels. Irenaeus,
a third-generation Christian, listed the New Testament books
he used with his students. How does this help prove the
reliability of the New Testament?
These early documents that referred to New Testament books
showed that people believed and accepted the eyewitness accounts.
If the eyewitness accounts weren't true or were questionable, people
would not have continued to refer to them, especially for teaching.
4. The speaker used to be a skeptic but then became a Christian
because of reliable evidence. Would having eyewitness
testimony about an event help make you feel more confident
about its authenticity? Why or why not?
Video 2:
Is the Bible Applicable?
1. What question do people generally ask when they read the
Bible?
What does this verse have to do with me?
2. Is that the first question we should be asking when we read the
Bible? Why or why not?
No, it isn't because not all verses in the Bible are relevant to us in the
same way they were to the people the verses were about.
CHAPTER 2 | 37


<!-- page-9 (book p.2) -->

CH
Videos
(continued)
3. What two steps does the speaker recommend for reading the Bible?
First ask what the text means: What is the context of that verse? Then ask what
the possible application is, if it has any at all.
4. Explain why Exodus 14:14 does not apply to us in the same way as it did
for the Israelites.
The context of Exodus 14:14 is when the Israelites were fleeing Pharaoh. That
verse was a promise given by God to the Israelites about a specific event, not a
promise for every reader's life situation.
5. How is Exodus 14:14 relevant to us?
It teaches us about God's nature and character. When he promises something, he
will fulfill it. God is trustworthy and faithful.
Note: If time allows, read Philippians 4:13. Explain that many people think this
verse means that they can do anything through God if they simply trust him.
Just reading the verse alone is a great example of taking it out of context, causing
it to be misunderstood. Now read Philippians 4:11-13. Reading it in context,
we can see that in his letter to the church of Philippi, Paul's intent was one of
contentment, not attainment, accomplishment, or achievement.
Video 3
Is the Bible's Impact Important?
1. Is the Bible the only religious book that has had a major impact on the
world? Is a books impact a good final measure for evaluating its value?
Why or why not?
No, there are other religious books that have had an impact on the world such as
the Quran or the Book of Mormon. While noting a book's impact is one way to
evaluate, it's not the only way to assess whether a book is communicating truth.
2. What is another way to assess a books value?
Determine if what the book says is true.
3. Compare the Quran and the Book of Mormon to the Bible. What makes
the Bible unique and different from those other religious books?
The Quran and the Book of Mormon are not the Word of God. The Bible
communicates the truth about who God is, who we are, and about our desperate
need for a Savior.
Video 4:
Isn't Christianity a Bunch of Rules and Regulations?
1. What is a common concern people have about Christianity?
People seem to think that God has a list of rules and regulations, and we have to
follow all of them legalistically.
2. What is the problem with this concern?
People who believe this don't understand Christianity as properly understood.
3. Do your parents have rules and expectations for you? What are some of
them? Why do you think your parents have those rules and expectations?
4. How is the relationship between children and their parents far more than
following a bunch of rules?
A relationship between children and their parents involves love. They invest in
each other's lives, do things together, help each other, talk things over together,
and challenge one another. The relationship is much richer and more dynamic
than dos and don'ts. The rules guide parents to love and care for their children.
5. How would you explain to someone that Christianity, God, and the Bible
are not just a bunch of rules and regulations we are required to follow?
Possible answer: There is more to the Christian faith than following all of God's
laws. Parents have rules for their children, too, but there is also a relationship
between them that entails more than obeying their rules. Yes, God has rules,
but more importantly, he wants a relationship with us because he loves us. God
created us in his image, invests time in our lives, and hears and answers our
prayers. We try to obey him, but we also want to serve and love him because he
loves us. Understanding a healthy relationship between parent and child helps
someone to understand the Christian faith.
CHAPTER 2
© What the Bible Is and Isn't
CHAPTER2 | 39


<!-- page-10 (book p.2) -->

CH
Lesson 8:
and
Review
The Bible Is the Word of God
in their student manual. Read
the directions. Divide the class
into five groups and give them
time to complete the activity.
Then, display PS 2.8A Chapter
2 Review to help students review
the concepts. Allow students to
take turns reading the slides
councanons
What the Bible Is and Isn't
40 | CHAPTER 2
THE BIBLE IS THE WORD
OF GOD
Students will defend that the Bible is truth and the
Word of God.
• Materials needed: student textbook and pen
• Time required: 20-30 minutes
PROCEDURE
1. Divide the class into five groups.
2. Assign each group one of the following five topics
from the student textbook:
• The Importance of the Bible in History
• Not Merely a Book of Instructions
• What Does It Mean to Call the Bible
"Revelation"?
• How We Got the Bible
• What Does It Mean to Say the Bible Is the
"Word of God"?
3. Have groups review their assigned sections in the
textbook and discuss how they would use that
information to show a skeptic that the Bible is
the true Word of God.
4. Each group should write five bullet points they
can use for their defense. Answers will vary.
5. Have each group present their points to the class.
6. After each group presents, allow students in the
other groups to provide feedback on points they
feel are the most compelling.
Lesson 9:
Study
Guide
Allow students to study for the
Chapter 2 Test. Have them turn
to the Study Guide in their
student manual and complete the
exercises.
Key Terms
Apocrypha
general revelation
special revelation
canon
inspiration
inerrancy
relativism
Key Verses
Psalm 19:1-4
Romans 1:19-20
Romans 2:14-15
2 Timothy 3:16
1. What are four ways the Bible has influenced the world?
The Bible is part of world literature. It has been a great influence
on our nation and changed Western civilization. Knowledge of the
Bible is the mark of an educated person.
2. List and explain four ways people approach and read the Bible
today.
Skeptics approach the Bible hesitantly because they are not sure that
what the Bible teaches is true or relevant. Skeptics tend to be critical
and point out perceived injustices or contradictions in the Bible.
Scholars study the Bible in depth. The skeptical scholar feels the
Bible is a human book of great literary worth. Christian scholars
often learn the original languages and study the Bible to know more
about God, his creation, and how to live out the Christian faith.
They desire to help people see God's Word come alive.
The seeker reads the Bible looking for answers to life's big questions.
Seekers view the Bible as a holy book but not necessarily the Holy
Book. Many believe other books, such as the Quran or the Vedas,
also contain religious truth. Others are open to the idea that the
Bible alone is God's Word. They are looking for truth, meaning,
purpose, and fulfillment.
Saints do more than read the Bible; they study it diligently to
understand how to apply it to life. Saints don't read the Bible just to
learn information. They do it to grow in their relationship with God.
3. Describe the different components of the Bible, and how it is
arranged.
The Bible has a total of 66 books and letters, and is divided into
two sections: the Old Testament, which has 39 books, and the New
Testament, which has 27 books. The first five books of the Old
Testament are called the Torah. The first four books of the New
Testament are the Gospels. The Old Testament includes books of
poetry, history, and prophecy. The New Testament books are about
Jesus' life, the history of the early church, letters written to churches
or other Christians, and prophecy.
4. Explain why the Bible is like a map. How it is like a compass?
The Bible is like a map because it gives perspective so you can orient
yourself to the world. It helps you find the right path so you can find
your way and live well in God's world. It shows you the way to go,
enabling you to navigate the world with wisdom. The Bible is like a
compass because a compass offers a reference point, or direction. The
compass needle points to north. The Bible points to truth. Deviating
from either one will cause a person to become lost.
CHAPTER 2 | 41


<!-- page-11 (book p.2) -->

CH
Lesson 9:
Study
Guide
(continued)
5. Explain the difference between general and special revelation.
General revelation is God's universal revelation about himself and morality
from nature and our conscience. General revelation is seen throughout creation.
Special revelation is God's unique revelation about himself through Jesus Christ,
the Holy Spirit, the Scriptures, and miraculous events.
6. How was the canon of Scripture formed?
In carly church history, certain books stood out to believers as being divinely
inspired. These books make up what scholars call the canon of Scripture. The
Old Testament canon was pretty much established by the time of Jesus. Three
criteria were used to decide which New Testament books were acknowledged
as inspired and authoritative. Guided by the Holy Spirit, the early church
recognized which books were God's revelation.
7. Describe the three criteria used to select the books of the New Testament.
The books of the New Testament canon were selected using three criteria:
apostolicity, orthodoxy, and pedigree. Apostolicity refers to whether the book
was written by an apostle or a companion of an apostle. Orthodoxy means that
the book conformed to the teachings of the apostles and the theology of the
early church leaders. Pedigree shows that a book was widely accepted by the early
churches in many different locations.
8. Explain why it is false to say the Bible contains God's words.
To say the Bible contains God's words implies that it could contain other things
as well. Some of these other things might not even be true. The problem here
lies with who decides what is God's Word and what is not. Declaring that the
Bible contains God's words puts the decision into human hands, which means
people decide what God's Word is. If people don't like something in the Bible,
then they could change it for a variety of reasons.
9. Give three reasons to be confident the entire Bible is God's Word.
• The Bible is inspired by God.
• The Bible is rooted in history.
• The Bible is inerrant.
10. What is the correspondence theory of truth? How does it relate to the
Bible?
The correspondence theory of truth states that a belief, thought, or statement is
true if it corresponds to reality. Most people agree that there is something wrong
with the world. However, not everyone agrees on why. The Bible makes it very
clear in Genesis 3 that people sinned and turned away from God's plan. The fall
explains the way the world truly is, and it helps us to understand reality.
11. Why is relativism a false belief?
Relativism is the belief that truth, knowledge, or morality is relative to the individual,
society, or historical context. This can mean that what is true for one person may not be
true for another person. If relativism were true, there would be no moral absolutes. Claims
such as "there is no truth" and "the truth cannot be known" are contradictory. They are
self-refuting claims because the statements are making a claim to be true, which contradicts
what the statement is saying.
12. Explain why truth matters.
Truth matters because without it we wouldn't have a foundation on which to build our
lives. If there were no truth, we wouldn't really know anything for sure. It would be very
confusing. But with truth, there is no confusion because truth tells us who we are, where
we are, to whom we belong, and the real story in which we live.
13. What is the Apocrypha?
The Apocrypha is Jewish literature written during the intertestamental period and included
in the Bible by some branches of Christianity.
14. Distinguish between inspiration and inerrancy.
Inspiration is the doctrine that God enabled people to write the words of Scripture.
Inerrancy refers to the doctrine that the Bible is without error in the original writings.
15. Read and study the four Key Verses listed at the beginning of the study guide.
42 CHAPTER 2
CHAPTER 2 | 43


<!-- page-12 (book p.2) -->

CH
Chapter 2
Test P
Distribute TR 2.10A Chapter 2 Test to each student and allow
time for them to complete the exercises. Students who finish
early may start reading Chapter 3. Assign homework.
Notes
44 | CHAPTER 2
Does the Bible
Have Authority?
BIBLE
HOLY
