# Chapter 3

<!-- page-1 (book p.2) -->

CH
Chapter 2
Test P
Distribute TR 2.10A Chapter 2 Test to each student and allow
time for them to complete the exercises. Students who finish
early may start reading Chapter 3. Assign homework.
Notes
44 | CHAPTER 2
Does the Bible
Have Authority?
BIBLE
HOLY


<!-- page-2 -->

Does the Bible
Have Authority?
Chapter 3 Syllabus
Lesson
REVIEW
WATCH
REVIEW FOR
STUDY FOR
GIVE
Assignment
Chapter 2 Test
Questions for Chapter 3.1-3.2
Activity: Jesus and the Old Testament
Chapter 3.3-3.4
Questions for Chapter 3.3-3.4
Questions for Chapter 3.3-3.4
Activity: Recognize the Evidence
Chapter 3.5-3.6
Questions for Chapter 3.5-3.6
Questions for Chapter 3.5-3.6
Activity: How High Is the Evidence?
Chapter 3.7-3.8
Questions for Chapter 3.7-3.8
Questions for Chapter 3.7-3.8
Activity: Answering the Skeptic
Chapter 3.9-3.10
Questions for Chapter 3.9-3.10
Questions for Chapter 3.9-3.10
Activity: Idolatry Bible Study
Activity: Recognize, Evaluate, Decide
Videos
Video Questions
Video Questions
Activity: Evidence Tag
Study Guide Questions
Chapter 4.1-4.2
Questions for Chapter 4.1-4.2
*Student Textbook (ST) Student Manual (SM)
A full-year syllabus is available in the online resources.
46 | CHAPTER 3
Page
ST 34-37
SM 48
50-51
ST 38-40
SM 50-51
52-53
ST 41-43
SM 52-53
54-55
ST 44-47
SM 54
SM 56-58
59-61
62-63
SM 61-63
64-67
ST 48-51
SM 66-67
Chapter 3
OVERVIEW
Submitting to authority requires faith in
that authority. For Christians, the lines of
authority are clear. Jesus is Lord, and God
conveys his authority most clearly through
Scripture. Internal and external evidence
demonstrate that the Bible's authority is
trustworthy.
Internal evidence shows that the
writers of the Old and New Testaments
did not intend to simply offer advice
or tell good stories but to share God's
authoritative revelation. Except in cases
where God gave specific messages to the
writers, God did not dictate what they
wrote, nor did the authors write their
own personal ideas about God. Instead,
God inspired the authors, who then
communicated God's truth using their
own writing styles. Jesus confirmed the
veracity of the Old Testament and said
that it was written about him. External
evidence from non-biblical sources and
archaeological discoveries confirm the
historical accuracy of the Bible. Historical
non-Christian writings and the writings of
the early church tathers contirm basic facts
about Jesus and authenticate the writings
of the apostles. The Dead Sea Scrolls and
many early New Testament manuscripts
confirm the Old and New Testament texts
were carefully preserved. By testing the
apostolicity, orthodoxy, and pedigree of
books claiming to be Scripture, we can
know which books belong in the Bible and
exclude those that do not.
God's authority extends over all of life,
including culture, government, knowledge,
emotions, and entertainment. Asking
questions of authorities, including God,
helps us grow intellectually, but must be
done with humility. God wants us to obey
him because it leads to flourishing.
PREPARATION
Lesson 2:
Bring markers and one poster board
for each group of three to four
students.
Lesson 3:
Provide calculators and rulers for the
activity. Computers are optional.
Lesson 4:
Obtain one index card per student and
a container. On one third of the cards
write: The Bible was written by humans.
On another third write: The Bible has
been corrupted. On the final third
write: Important books have been left
out of the Bible.
Lesson 5:
Make a copy of TR 3.5A Idolatry Bible
Study for each student. Make one copy
of the Answer Key for yourself.
Lesson 6:
Preview PS 3.6A Recognize, Evaluate,
Decide. Mark index cards according to
slide 20.
Access and preview the videos listed
on Lesson 7. See the inside back cover
of this manual for instructions to
stream videos.
Lesson 8:
Bring in masking tape and one soft
object to toss for each group of six
students. Make one copy of TR 3.8A-B
Internal Evidence Tags and External
Evidence Tags. Cut the tags apart.
Make a copy of TR 3.10A Chapter 3
Test for each student.
LESSON MATERIALS
Presentation Slides
PS 3.6A Recognize, Evaluate, Decide
PS 3.8A Chapter 3 Review
Teacher Resources
TR 3.5A Idolatry Bible Study
TR 3.8A - B Internal-External Evidence Tags
TR 3.10A Chapter 3 Test
CHAPTER 3 4/


<!-- page-3 -->

CH
Lesson 1:
3.1-3.2
Review Chapter 2 Test. Have
students turn to page 31 in
their student textbook. Read the
objectives to the class. Go over
the answers to the Discussion
Questions for Chapter 3.1-3.2
on pages 46-47 in the student
manual. Have students turn to
Activity: Jesus and the Old
Testament in their student
manual. Assign the homework.
articulate what authority is
and what it means to submit
to God's authority. [3.1]
• Students will be able to use
internal evidence from the
Bible to defend the Old
Testament's authority. [3.2]
give specific examples of
how Jesus confirmed his
trust in the Old Testament.
[3.2]
48 | CHAPTER 3
1. Is it ever okay to question authority? Why or why not? [3.1]
The word authority comes from a Latin word meaning influence
or command. It answers the question, "Who's in charge?" Because
human authorities are plagued by sin like the rest of us, it is perfectly
acceptable to question these authorities by carefully evaluating
what they say and respectfully asking questions with humility.
We should not blindly follow every person who claims to have
authority. However, the statement "question authority" can quickly
become an exercise in selfish, radical individualism. Everyone serves
somebody or something. So, the question is not if we will submit to
authority, but which authority we will submit to.
2. What does it mean to confess "Jesus is Lord": [3.1]
To confess "Jesus is Lord" is to submit to Jesus' authority and obey
him in everyday life. The New Testament word for obey means
to hear under (to place oneself under authority). Obeying Jesus'
teaching and following his example is a journey toward becoming
more like Jesus. Those who trust in Jesus are on a path to become
more like him (Romans 8:29). Thankfully, God does not hide
himself or what he desires from us. God makes himself known and
conveys his authority clearly in the Bible. So, to confess that Jesus is
Lord is also to trust what he reveals about himself and be obedient
to his commands in Scripture.
3. How did the Old Testament authors indicate that their
writings were authoritative? [3.2]
Biblical writers often use phrases like "Thus says the LORD" and
"The Word of the LORD came to me." These statements occur over
2,000 times in the Old Testament. Hebrews 1:1-2 affirms that God
communicated his Word through biblical prophets.
Note: A prophet who falsely claimed to speak for God was in serious
danger of punishment (Deuteronomy 18:20). It is significant that
biblical prophets claimed to be speaking God's Word, while most of
the authors of apocryphal books do not make this claim. This is one
reason why many Christians do not consider the Apocrypha to be
"God's Word."
4. Why does Jesus' affirmation of the Old Testament matter?
[3.2]
If Jesus is who he claimed to be, then his affirmation of the Old
Testament matters because it validates the authority of the Old
Testament. His treatment of the Old Testament also guides how
we should read and understand it.
FOUNDATIONS G
JESUS AND THE OLD TESTAMENT
Students will analyze
1. Have students work in pairs. Assign each pair one of the
Scripture passages for
following questions with its accompanying Bible verse(s).
truths about Jesus'
Instruct students to put a checkmark by their assigned
support for the authority
of the Old Testament.
question.
• How does Jesus confirm the divine origin of Scripture?
(Mark 7:13)
• How does Jesus show belief that Scripture is the final
student textbook, Bible,
paper, and pen
15-20 minutes
authority? (Matthew 15:3, 19:4-5)
• How does Jesus demonstrate belief that the Old
Testament prophecies would be fulfilled?
(John 13:18, 15:25)
• How does Jesus confirm that Old Testament miracles
were real? (Matthew 12:40)
• How did Jesus rely on the Old Testament in times of
distress? (Matthew 4:3-4, Mark 15:34)
• How did Jesus' use of Old Testament stories
demonstrate how he viewed the Old Testament?
(Mark 2:25, John 8:56)
• How did Jesus reaffirm the Old Testament?
(Matthew 5:17-20)
• How did Jesus base his own teaching on the Old
Testament? (Genesis 1:27, Mark 10:6)
• How did Jesus indicate that Scripture is not merely
human tradition? (Matthew 15:3)
• How did Jesus build on the foundation of the Old
Testament? (Matthew 5:27-28)
2. Have pairs read their assigned verses, discuss the question,
and write the answer on their paper.
3. Have pairs present their answers to the class. Use the list
in Chapter 3.2 of the student textbook as a guideline for
checking answers.
CHAPTER 3 | 49


<!-- page-4 -->

CH
Lesson 2:
3.3-3.4 P
Chapter 3.3-3.4.
Have students turn to Activity:
Recognize the Evidence in
their student manual. Read the
directions. Have students work
in groups of three or four. Assign
the homework.
describe the apostles intent
and authority for writing the
New Testament. [3.3]
identify specific examples
of external evidence that
support the Old Testament's
reliability. [3.4]
50 | CHAPTER 3
1. In what ways did the New Testament writers talk about the
authority of their writings? [3.3]
The apostles were granted authority by Jesus to bear witness about
him (Matthew 28:16-20). Inspired by the Holy Spirit, the apostles
shared the gospel in their many writings. John reiterated older
commands while offering new ones (1 John 2:7-8). Peter considered
the writings of Paul to be equal to the rest of Scripture [even though
he said that some of Paul's writings were hard to understand! (2
Peter 3:15-16)]. Paul claimed to be sharing God's commands and
proclaiming God's word (1 Corinthians 14:37-38, 1 Thessalonians
2:13). Paul wasn't just writing his own opinions.
2. Does the internal evidence for the authority of Scripture prove
anything? Why or why not? [3.3]
Possible answers: Internal evidence alone doesn't necessarily prove
the Bible is authoritative. After all, anybody could pick up a pen and
claim to be writing God's Word. Throughout history, many false
teachers have done just that. Internal evidence shows that the Bible
claims to be the authoritative Word of God. It shows the authors of
Scripture believed they were speaking God's Word. This is significant
for two reasons.
First, if the authors themselves didn't believe their writings were
inspired by God, then there would be little reason for Christians
today to consider the Bible God's authoritative word. Second, the
fact that all the biblical authors (writing in such different times and
places) all manage to teach a consistent message makes their claims
to be speaking God's Word much more believable.
3. How do historical and archaeological discoveries support the
reliability of the Old Testament? [3.4]
The Old Testament describes or predicts many historical events that
occurred in the ancient world. Historians and archaeologists have
made numerous discoveries confirming that several events described
in the Old Testament really happened, including Sennacherib's
campaign against Judah described in 2 Kings 18:13, the fall of
Nineveh predicted in Nahum 1:1-3:19 and Isaiah 10:5-19, and
many more. Over 50 people in the Bible have been confirmed from
sources outside the Bible, and archaeologists have discovered the
remains of many ancient cities mentioned in the Bible. Some of
Solomon's building projects have been unearthed and Hezekiah's
tunnel has also been found.
4. What role does fulfilled prophecy play in supporting the reliability of the
Old Testament? [3.4]
The Old Testament prophesies many events that occurred as predicted. Some
of these prophecies were fulfilled long after they were foretold. For example,
when the Jews were exiled in Babylon, Jeremiah prophesied that they would one
day return to the promised land. The Bible records the prophecy's fulfillment
in Ezra 1:5 and Nehemiah 2:16-17. Jeremiah also predicted that the region of
Edom would be toppled and humbled (Jeremiah 49:17) long before it occured.
Most importantly, the Old Testament accurately predicted the coming of the
Messiah, Jesus. At least 55 Old Testament prophecies about the birth, life, death,
and resurrection of the Messiah were fulfilled by Jesus. Some scholars estimate
that there are over 300 prophecies about the Messiah in the Old Testament that
pertain to Jesus.
RECOGNIZE THE EVIDENCE
Students will create
1. Have students work in groups of three or four.
memory aids to help them
Distribute poster board and markers. Assign each
recall specific evidence for
group a category: a) historical events confirmed by
the reliability of the Old
extra-biblical sources, b) archaeological discoveries,
Testament.
or c) fulfillment of prophecies. Some categories will be
used more than twice depending on the number
poster board and markers
of groups.
2. Have students brainstorm and design symbols,
acronyms, rhymes, or visual cues that can help
them memorize two to four examples of non-biblical
evidence affirming the reliability of the Old Testament.
Note: Students do not need to include all evidence in
their category from the student text.
3. Have students present their memory aids to the class.
CHAPTER 3 | 51


<!-- page-5 -->

CH
Lesson 3:
3.5-3.6 P
Chapter 3.5-3.6. Have students
turn to Activity: How High Is
the Evidence? in their student
manual. Read the directions.
Have students work in pairs.
Assign the homework.
• Students will be able to list
ancient non-biblical writings
that confirm the historicity of
Jesus and the teaching of the
early Christians. [3.5]
© Students will be able
to describe the role of
eyewitness testimony and the
church fathers in affirming
the accuracy of the Gospels.
[3.5]
explain how the Dead Sea
Scrolls and many early New
Testament manuscripts
confirm the accurate
preservation of the biblical
writings. [3.6]
52 | CHAPTER 3
1. What ancient non-Christian writings mention Jesus and the
basic teachings of the early Christians? Why are these sources
important? [3.5]
Non-Christian writings that confirm Jesus' existence and specifics
of his death, as well as the beliefs of his followers, include the
writings of Josephus, Tacitus, Pliny the Younger, and the Talmud.
These records help confirm, without relying on Christian sources,
that Jesus was indeed a historical person. The events of the Gospels
were not fabricated; they can be cross-checked with non-Christian
historical records.
2. How do historical and archaeological discoveries support the
reliability of the New Testament? [3.5]
From non-Christian historical writings outside the New Testament,
scholars can confirm the existence of Jesus, his role as a teacher, the
fact that some believed he could perform miracles and healings,
the Jewish leaders rejected him, he was crucified by Pilate, and his
disciples believed he was alive after his crucifixion. Scholars have also
discovered archeological evidence for many historical details carefully
recorded in the book of Acts, including Paul's missionary journeys.
Finally, the details in several of the accounts of Jesus' miracles
provide enough information for scholars to accept them as plausible.
3. How important is external evidence in supporting the
reliability of Scripture? [3.5]
While the truth of Scripture is not dependent on external evidence,
historical and archaeological evidence gives us confidence that the
writers of Scripture were not simply making things up. External
evidence reveals that trust in the authority of Scripture is not blind
or foolish.
Note: Students should know that the truth of Scripture does not
depend wholly on external evidence. Not every event or place in
Scripture has been historically or archaeologically verified. But this
is true about many other books that record history. Much of the
ancient world is still unexcavated. Still, we can trust the authority of
Scripture as a matter of trusting the God who is revealed in it, even
when we don't yet have external evidence to support every historical
claim in Scripture. That said, the external evidence that has been
discovered provides a strong supporting case for the reliability of
Scripture.
4. What evidence is there that the Old Testament has been
accurately preserved? [3.6]
The Dead Sea Scrolls provide a stunning example of the care used
to copy and preserve the Scriptures. The near-complete copy of the
book of Isaiah found at Qumran was almost 1,000 years older than
the oldest copy of Isaiah known at that time. Yet, it is practically
word-for-word when compared with newer copies of Isaiah. The tradition of careful copying
continued over time. In the Middle Ages, a group of scribes known as the Masoretes took
extreme measures to ensure their copies of Scripture exactly matched the originals. They
carefully copied letter by letter from the original documents, kept detailed statistics, and
counted the number of words and letters to ensure perfect accuracy.
5. What evidence supports the notion that the New Testament has been accurately
preserved? [3.6]
The New Testament writings were copied and dispersed widely soon after they were written,
eliminating time for potential forgeries and embellishments. Also, the more manuscripts
scholars have, the more accurately they can determine the exact nature of the original texr.
There are over 25,000 New Testament manuscripts-far more manuscripts than any other
ancient text. Finally, there is 99.5 percent agreement among New Testament manuscripts.
The majority of differences are in spelling, grammar, word order, and minor deletions or
additions. None of these differences affect any essential doctrines of the Christian faith.
HOW HIGH IS THE EVIDENCE?
Students will compare the available
• Materials needed: calculator, ruler,
New Testament manuscripts with the
available manuscripts of other ancient
computer (optional), paper, and
pencil
documents.
• Time required: 15-20 minutes
1. Have students over five feet five inches give you a thumbs up and tell you their height.
Write each height on the board. Then have each student under five feet five inches give
you the "v for victory" sign and tell you their height. Write each height on the board.
2. Allow a few minutes for students to add up the total of their combined heights.
3. Have students work in pairs to create a bar graph showing the students' total height, the
height of stacked New Testament manuscripts, and the average stack of other ancient
non-biblical manuscript collections. (If a computer is available, students may add more
bars to their graph by researching specific numbers of manuscripts for other ancient
documents, such as Homer's Iliad, or other frames of reference, such as the height of the
Empire State Building).
4. Tell students that as of 2017, the total number of early New Testament manuscripts
in Greek totaled over 5,800 and early non-Greek manuscripts totaled over 18,130 for
an overall total of more than 23,930 early manuscripts. If all these manuscripts were
stacked, they would be over a mile high. Stacks of existing manuscripts from other
ancient books average four feet high.t
5. Allow students to compare their graphs and make comments.
' Josh MeDowell and Sean McDowell, Evidence that Demands a Verdict: Life-changing truth for a skeptical world (Nashville, Thomas
Nelson: 2017), 52-53.
• Does the Bible Have Authority?
CHAPTER 3 | 53


<!-- page-6 (book p.3) -->

CH
Lesson 4:
3.7-3.8 p
Chapters 3.7-3.8. Have students
turn to Activity: Answering the
Skeptic in their student manual.
Read the directions. Have
students work in pairs. Assign the
homework.
appraise and formulate
responses to three common
objections to the reliability
and authority of the Bible.
[3.7]
summarize five areas of
life that are under God's
authority. [3.8]
54 | CHAPTER 3
1. How could you respond to someone who says the Bible is just
another human book written by fallible people? [3.7]
You could start by asking the person if they think that human
beings can write anything true. And if so, would they be capable
of truthfully writing down what God told them to? Apologist Greg
Koukl asks the following questions, "Do you have any books in
your library? Were those books written by humans? Do you find any
truth in them? Is there a reason you think the Bible is less truthful or
reliable than other books you own? Do people always make mistakes
in what they write? Do you think that if God did exist, he would be
capable of using humans to write down exactly what he wants? If
not, why not?" By graciously asking these questions, you might be
able to help the person see that assuming God exists, it is entirely
possible that he could use humans to faithfully record his truth.
2. How could you respond to someone who says the Bible has
been corrupted over time? [3.7]
A good way to respond to this objection would be to acknowledge
that there are a great number of textual variants-
-that is, differences
between particular words, phrases, or passages within multiple
copies of the same manuscript—among the biblical manuscripts
that exist. However, the majority of these differences are spelling
errors, unclear readings, and obviously implausible alterations in
questionable manuscripts. Scholars Darrell Bock and Daniel Wallace
have determined that less than 1 percent of all textual variants affect
the meaning of the text. That's fewer than 4,000 variants out of
over 400,000. That may still seem like a lot of variants, but of those
4,000, none affect any major doctrines.
3. How could you respond to someone who says that important
books have been excluded from the Bible? [3.7]
This objection often stems from the discovery of the lost gospels in
1945. Novels like The Da Vinci Code by Dan Brown popularized
the myth that the church unfairly suppressed these books. However,
these books were not included in Scripture for good reason. The lost
gospels fail all three of the criteria used to determine which books
are authentic Scripture. Most of these documents were written in
the third and fourth centuries, meaning that none were written by
apostles (apostolicity), nor were they widely accepted in the early
church (pedigree). As to orthodoxy, these books promote a teaching
called gnosticism, which is not a different Christian denomination.
Gnosticism opposes the core teachings of Christianity.
4. How is gnosticism different from Christianity? [3.7]
Gnosticism taught that the world was made by a lesser divine being,
and the material world and body are intrinsically evil. Christianity
teaches that there is only one God, and he created the material
world. The physical world is not an evil place to be escaped, but a good place that has been
corrupted by sin. Yet, one day God will restore the world. Some gnostics taught that Jesus was a
spirit who appeared to be human, and the way to be saved was not through Jesus, but through
obtaining special knowledge. Christianity teaches that God became human in Jesus to accomplish
our salvation.
Note: The term Gnosticism is capitalized when referring to the religious group formed in the first
and second centuries. When referring to a worldview, the word gnosticism is not capitalized.
5. How far does God's authority extend? [3.8]
God is the true Creator and sustainer of all life. Every area of life falls under his authority, as
demonstrated in Scripture, which expresses God's desire for our lives. God has authority over:
• Culture: His standards of right and wrong are true for all cultures at all times.
• Government: All governmental authorities derive their authority from God.
• Knowledge: God sets the limits and boundaries of knowledge.
• Emotions: God's truth helps us to evaluate the trustworthiness of our emotions.
• Entertainment: Who we listen to and what we watch should be filtered through God's
standards of what is good and beautiful.
ANSWERING THE SKEPTIC
Students will respond to
common objections to
the authority of the Bible.
• Materials needed: index
cards with prewritten
sentences, container,
and pen
1. Have students work with a partner for role play. One
student will act as the skeptic and the other will respond
as the Christian.
2. Have one student in each pair draw a card from the
container. The student with the card will be the skeptic
and may not show the card to the other student. Remind
students who are speaking the role of the Christian to ask
questions for clarity respectfully, such as, What do you mean
by _
? and How did you come to that conclusion?
3. The skeptic will start a brief conversation about
Christianity or the Bible with the student playing the role
of the Christian. During the conversation, the skeptic will
bring up the objection on the card they drew, preferably in
their own words. The Christian will respond by using the
information they learned in the lesson.
4. Once a pair of students finishes their initial role play, they
will put the card back into the container. Then, they will
switch roles and the new skeptic will draw a new index
card with a different objection from the container and
repeat the activity.
CHAPTER 3 | 55
• Does the Bible Have Authority?


<!-- page-7 -->

CH
Lesson 5:
3.9-3.10 p
Read the objectives to the class.
Go over the answers to the
Discussion Questions for Chapter
3.9-3.10. Have students turn to
Activity: Idolatry Bible Study in
their student manual. Distribute
TR 3.5A Idolatry Bible Study
to students. Have them read and
complete the exercise. Have a
copy of the answer key available.
describe the importance of
examining and evaluating all
truth claims for accuracy. [3.9]
• Students will be able to explain
why God wants people to obey
him. [3.9]
56 | CHAPTER 3
1. What if an authority figure in your life makes a mistake or
is wrong about something-
-does that give you the right to
ignore or disobey him or her? Why or why not? [3.9]
Every authority figure is a sinful human being who will make
mistakes. However, this does not always mean that we should reject
their authority. If we turn away from our parents authority, we will
look to another authority, whether that be another person or the
authority of our culture (by doing what everyone else is doing).
Note: A person experiencing abusive authority needs to seek outside
help and support for his or her own safety.
2. How should Christians question authority? [3.9]
It may be appropriate to challenge authorities when we genuinely
believe they are wrong. When this is necessary, Christians should
question them in a spirit of humility while having a genuine desire
to learn.
Note: It is also entirely appropriate to ask questions about the Bible
and how its authority works in our lives.
Consulting a wise pastor,
mentor, friend, or book can help answer questions about the Bible.
3. How does God use his authority? [3.9]
God's authority extends over every area of life and presents us with
a great challenge. We are to be good stewards of our minds and our
physical bodies. We are told to be truthful, loving, generous, and
hospitable. But God does not instruct us in these things because
he is a power-hungry control freak. Nor does he use his authority
to bully or manipulate us. Rather, God asks us to submit to his
authority, because in doing so we find true life. Obeying God will
help us to become all that he created us to be.
4. Why does submitting to authority require faith? Is this blind
faith? [3.10]
People who get on an airplane must have faith in physics, engineering,
the pilots, the air traffic control system, the maintenance crew, and
much more. They submit to the authority of the aircraft's designers,
trusting that the plane will not fall out of the air. This is not blind
faith since there are good reasons to trust that air travel is generally
safe. Similarly, by submitting to God's authority as expressed in
Scripture, we have faith that he knows what he is doing and that
his Word is trustworthy. This need not be blind faith. The evidence
provides good reasons to believe that Scripture is reliable and
conveys God's authority.
IDOLATRY BIBLE STUDY
Students will analyze verses
1. Distribute a copy of TR 3.5A Idolatry Bible Study to
about idolatry and explain
each student.
how they apply to people
today.
2. Read the instructions and direct students to complete
the activity individually.
3. Have students share their answers with the class.
TR 3.5A, Bible, and pen
4. If time permits, discuss the questions below:
• Which step-recognize, evaluate, or decide-did
you find most helpful? Explain.
• What were your initial thoughts when you read
Exodus 20:1-6?
• How does Romans 1:18-20 relate to Exodus
20:1-6?
• Do you think it is possible to make an idol out of
yourself? How?
• God should always be our Provider, Protector, and
Source of power. Are there any ways in which you
have attempted to do God's job? For example, have
you ever tried to make something happen the way
you wanted it to go?
CHAPTER 3 | 57


<!-- page-8 -->

CH
Lesson 6:
Use PS 3.GA Recognize,
Evaluate, Decide to lead
students through the activity.
OBJECTIVE
• Students will apply analytical
tools that help them evaluate
and respond to the Bible's
claims to authority.
PREPARATION
• Materials needed: PS 3.6A,
color-marked index cards,
pen, and stopwatch
• Time required: 40-45
minutes
Does the Bible Have Authority?
Recognize, Evaluate, Decide
58 | CHAPTER 3
RECOGNIZE, EVALUATE, DECIDE
1. Display PS 3.6A Recognize, Evaluate, Decide. Show slide
1 and introduce the acronym to the students. Read and
discuss the prompt on slide 2.
2. Show slide 3 and play the game Misconstrued" (slides
4-11) to the students.
3. Show slide 12 and discuss the questions. Answers to slide
12 are on slide 13.
4. Use the objection on slide 14 to introduce the game "Bible
Telephone" on slide 15 to the students.
5. Show slide 16 and follow the directions. Have the
students form a straight line, play the first "Telephone"
variant, and discuss the results (Note: Use a funny
sentence like, "Can you possibly pry a serious secret from
a mysterious mussel?" or "Three old miners commenced a
claim-jumping calamity.") Use the information on slide 17
to transition to the next phase of the game.
6. Show slide 18 and follow the directions for the next
variant of "Telephone," this time separating students into
three lines. Use a different silly sentence than you used
in the first variant. After completing the task, have the
students answer the questions on the slide. The original
message should be easier to reconstruct with all three
groups working together. Use the information on slide 19
to transition to the next phase of the game.
7. Divide the students into three groups and give each
student a pen and an index card marked with his or her
group color. Read the directions on slide 20 and change to
slide 21 when Group 1 is ready to start their task. Do not
allow Groups 2 and 3 to look at slide 21.
8. Use slide 22 to instruct the students from Group 1 to hand
off their index cards to Group 2, who will copy them in
the time allowed. When they have finished, use slide 23
to instruct Group 2 to repeat the process, handing their
cards (NOT Group 1's cards) to Group 3 and completing
the task in the time allotted.
9. Show slide 24 and follow the directions to add up the
variants and discuss the outcome of the game.
10. Summarize the Evaluate portion of the activity using
slides 25 and 26, then read and discuss the Decide
portion on slide 27. Finish by reviewing the Decide section
summary on slide 28 and the acronym on slide 29.
FOUNDATIONS 5
Videos P
In this lesson, students will view
five interviews with detective
and apologist J. Warner Wallace,
who will offer expert answers to a
specific worldview or apologetics
question. A sixth interview may
also be used if time permits.
These videos will allow students
to expand their knowledge
and provide biblical answers to
thought-provoking questions. The
following videos will be used in
today's lesson:
1. Why Does Our Faith Need
Evidence? (Wallace, 2:42)
2. Is It Possible to Make a Case
for Christianity without the
Bible? (Wallace, 1:59)
3. What Makes Eyewitness
Testimony Important?
(Wallace, 3:15)
4. How Was the New Testament
Created? (Wallace, 2:56)
5. Can We Rely on the Disciples'
Words in the Gospels?
(Wallace, 2:14)
6. Don't the Gospels Contradict?
(Wallace, 2:55) (optional)
Play the videos one at a time in
the order listed above. Before
each video, direct students to
read the questions associated
with that video in their student
manual so they know what to
listen for. After the video has been
shown, students should write
their answers to the Discussion
Questions. It may be necessary to
play the video again so students
can answer all the questions.
Go over the questions for the
first video. Play the next video.
Continue in this manner until
the last video has been played and
questions have been discussed.
• Video 1:
Why Does Our Faith Need Evidence?
1. Why do some people walk away from Christianity temporarily
or permanently?
People may walk away because they often can't articulate why they
believe what they believe as Christians. Also, some may be drawn
away by an alternative worldview that allows them to pursue sinful
passions without accountability or consequence.
2. What is a strong alternative to blind faith?
A forensic faith, a faith that is built on evidence, is a stronger basis
for faith than blind faith. While it does involve trust, it is rooted in
evidence.
3. What does developing forensic faith do for us?
It guards us from false ideas, holds us steady in difficult times, and
leads us back to truth.
• Video 2:
Is It Possible to Make a Case for Christianity without the
Bible?
1. Can the case for a creator be made without the Bible? Explain
your answer.
Yes, we could make that case from the appearance of design in
biology and the appearance of fine-tuning of the universe.
2. Does the evidence of design in biology and the fine-tuning of
the universe make a compelling case for Christianity? Why or
why not?
No, this makes a case more broadly for theism, but not for
Christianity specifically.
3. What is the key evidence for the truth of Christianity, and how
does it relate to the eyewitness accounts in the Gospels?
The key evidence for Christianity is the resurrection of Christ. Once
we know that the resurrection occurred, we know who the true God
is, the intelligent Designer who created the universe.
CHAPTER 3 | 59


<!-- page-9 (book p.3) -->

CH
Videos
(continued)
Video 3
What Makes Eyewitness Testimony Important?
1. What is a key difference between Christianity and other theistic
worldviews?
Unlike Christianity, other theistic worldview systems are largely a collection of
proverbs. They don't make claims about history that can be tested. In contrast,
Christianity centers around claims about something that happened in the first
century: the resurrection of Jesus. Christianity is testable.
2. Why are eyewitness accounts important?
Eyewitnesses are helpful for answering questions about things that happened in
the past. They are also the only form of direct evidence for an event.
3. What writings were used by early Christians? What was the criteria for
including writings in the New Testament canon?
Several books used by the early Christians in the local churches didn't make
it into the canon. Only books written by eyewitnesses were accepted as
authoritative Scripture. This includes Paul, who had a personal eyewitness
experience with Jesus later and whose works were affirmed by Peter.
Video 4:
How Was the New Testament Created?
1. How was the New Testament created?
The New Testament canon was formed organically by the eyewitnesses and their
students.
2. Explain the relationship between the eyewitnesses and the students whose
work confirms most of the New Testament canon.
The apostle John had three students (Ignatius, Polycarp, and Papias). Then those
three had a student (Arenaus) who used 24 of the New Testament books to teach
his students. We know this because Arenaus described these 24 books in his
writings.
3. Was the first New Testament canon formed and put into use before,
during, or after the earliest church councils?
The first New Testament canon was formed and used before the earliest church
councils. The apostle John's students were using 24 books of the canon hundreds
of years before the earliest church councils.
4. What role did the church councils play?
The councils did not create the canon; they simply confirmed the canon. They
met to address false ideas emerging about Jesus that contradicted the documents
of the eyewitnesses and their students. The councils affirmed what had always
been true about Jesus, formally rejecting false ideas.
5. What three criteria did the church councils use to evaluate false ideas and
documents about Jesus?
They examined them and found they were not true, were written late, and were
not written by eyewitnesses.
Video 5:
Can We Rely on the Disciples' Words in the Gospels?
1. Does the fact that the Gospels were written by Christians hurt their
credibility as the testimony of eyewitnesses? Why or why not?
No, it does not. The disciples became Christians because of what they saw, so
being Christians at the time of writing is not a disqualification.
2. What are the four tests used by detectives to determine if an eyewitness
can be trusted?
The four tests are: whether or not they were really there to see what they said
they saw, whether or not their testimony can be corroborated in some way,
whether or not they've changed their testimony over time, and whether or not
they possess some bias(es) that would cause them to lie.
Video 6:
Don't the Gospels Contradict? (optional)
1. Why should we consider the Gospel accounts as eyewitness testimony?
Because the writers communicated claims that they either saw the events
personally or talked to people who did.
2. Why are there differences between eyewitness accounts of an event?
Witnesses may have a slightly different geographic location or different interests
(such as fashion, etc.) that cause them to prioritize certain details over others.
3. Should we trust the testimony of eyewitnesses more when they match
perfectly or when they contain variances?
When they have variances. If the accounts line up perfectly, then its likely the
witnesses coordinated their accounts in some way, whether intentionally or by
comparing notes and adapting their stories.
60 | CHAPTER 3
CHAPTER 3 | 61


<!-- page-10 -->

CH
Lesson 8:
and
Review
Have the cards you cut from TRs
3.8A-B Internal Evidence Tags
and External Evidence Tags
available. Lead students through
Activity: Evidence Tag.
Then, display PS 3.8A Chapter
3 Review to help students review
the concepts. Allow students to
take turns reading the slides.
Understanding the Faith
Does the Bible Have Authority?
62 | CHAPTER 3
EVIDENCE TAG
Students will identify and categorize specific evidence
as either internal or external evidence for the reliability
of Scripture.
• Materials needed: TRs 3.8A-B, masking tape, and a
soft object to toss
• Time required: 20-25 minutes
1. Have each student take an "evidence tag" from TRs
3.8A-B Internal Evidence Tags or External Evidence
Tags and tape it to the front of their clothing.
2. Have the students form circles of at least six
students. There are six categories of evidence (three
internal evidence categories and three external
evidence categories), so be sure that at least one
evidence tag from each category is represented in
the circle of students.
3. Give each group a soft, lightweight ball or object
that can be safely tossed from person to person.
Explain to students that evidence has to be properly
categorized by scholars or investigators. Allow
students a few minutes to identify whether their tags
belong to the internal evidence group or external
evidence group.
4. Then, call out "external evidence" or "internal
evidence, and instruct the students to toss the
ball to someone wearing the label you called out.
If a student tosses the ball to someone wearing
evidence in the wrong category (e.g. tossing the
ball to someone labeled with an archaeological
discovery when you called out "internal evidence!"),
then the student must sit down. The student may
still participate in the game but must remain seated.
The last student standing wins the round.
5. If time permits, change the groups so students can
interact with a different set of evidence.
102294
Activity (continued)
Internal evidence tags:
Declaration-"Thus says the LORD..."
Declaration-"Long ago.... God spoke to our fathers by the prophets."
Declaration-"The Word of the LORD came to me..."
Jesus' Trust-He assumed Scripture is the final authority.
Jesus' Trust-He leaned on the Scriptures when he is in personal anguish.
Jesus' Trust-He treated miraculous Old Testament events as real history.
Apostles Said-Jesus gave apostles authority to bear witness about him.
Apostles Said-John reiterated old commands and offered new ones.
Apostles Said-Peter declared Paul's letters are also Scripture.
External evidence tags:
Ancient Historical Source-Confirmed the revolt of Moab against Israel
Ancient Historical Source-Confirmed the fall of Jerusalem to Nebuchadnezzar
Ancient Historical Source-Confirmed the assassination of Sennacherib by his own sons
Archaeological Discovery-Found most of the cities mentioned in Genesis-Joshua
Archaeological Discovery-Monolith inscription of Shalmaneser Ill mentions "Ahab the
Israelite"
Archaeological Discovery-Found Hezekiah's tunnel
Fulfilled Prophecy-Babylon ruled Judah for 70 years
Fulfilled Prophecy-Jews survived Babylonian rule returned to the Promised Land
Fulfilled Prophecy-Edom conquered (by the Nabateans)
FOUNDATIONS 9
CHAPTER 3 63
g Does the Bible Have Authority?


<!-- page-11 -->

CH
Lesson 9:
Study
Guide
Allow students to study for the
Chapter 3 Test. Have them turn
to the Study Guide in their
student manual and complete
the exercises.
Key Terms
church fathers
Dead Sea Scrolls
textual variants
lost gospels
gnosticism
Key Verses
Proverbs 30:5-6
2 Peter 3:15-16
1 John 1:1
2 Peter 1:20-21
64 CHAPTER 3
1. What is authority, and what does it mean to submit to God's
authority?
Authority is influence or command over someone or something. It
answers the question "Who's in charge?" To submit to God's authority
is to embrace Jesus worldview, believe, and obey what he taught.
2. Use internal evidence to defend the Old Testament's authority.
The Bible claims authority for itself. The Old Testament contains
more than 3,000 instances of phrases like "Thus says the LORD"
and "The Word of the LORD came to me." The writers claimed to
be sharing God's authoritative revelation, and that his revelation is
perfect, right, and flawless. Recognizing the Old Testament's claims
to authority is the first step to evaluating those claims.
3. Give specific examples of how Jesus confirmed his trust in the
Old Testament.
Jesus referred to the Old Testament as the present and eternal truth
of God. He always assumed Scripture is the final authority and all
parts are of equal authority. He assumed Old Testament prophecies
must be fulfilled as given, and treated the miraculous events of the
Old Testament as if they occurred exactly as written. Jesus leaned
on the Old Testament in his personal spiritual anguish. Jesus never
hesitated to confront error. He found nothing to confront in the
Old Testament. Rather, he built on the Old Testament by clarifying
the profound extent to which its teachings must be applied.
4. Describe the internal evidence for the apostles' intent and
authority for writing the New Testament.
Jesus gave the apostles authority to bear witness about him and
promised that the Holy Spirit would help them do this. The Holy
Spirit inspired the apostles to share the gospel in the New Testament.
The apostle John demonstrated this authority by reiterating old
commands and offering new commands. The apostle Peter also
confirmed that the writings of Paul had the authority of Scripture.
5. Identify specific examples of external evidence that support
the Old Testament's reliability.
Non-biblical historical sources: The campaign into Israel by Pharaoh
Shishak; Moab's revolt against Israel; Ashdod's defeat by Sargon
II; Sennacherib's campaign against Judah; the siege of Lachish by
Sennacherib; the assassination of Sennacherib by his sons; Nineveh's
fall predicted by prophets; Jerusalem's fall to Nebuchadnezzar; the
captivity of Judah's King Jehoiachin in Babylon.
Archaeological discoveries: Most of the cities mentioned from
Genesis through the book of Joshua have been discovered; some
of Solomon's building projects have been unearthed at Megiddo
and Gezer; the Monolith inscription of Shalmaneser III mentions
"Ahab the Israelite" as having the most powerful military elements
in the Israelite and Syrian coalition; the Khorsabad Annals give the account of Sargon IT's
captivity of Samaria in 722 Bc, the tunnel Hezekiah built to bring water into Jerusalem has
been found.
Fulfilled prophecies: Babylon ruling over Judah for 70 years (predicted in Jeremiah
25:11-12, fulfilled in 2 Chronicles 36:20-21); Jews surviving Babylonian rule and
returning to the Promised Land (predicted in Jeremiah 32:36-37, fulfilled in Ezra 1:6,
Nehemiah 2:16-17); Babylon's kingdom being overthrown and reduced to swampland
(predicted in Isaiah 13:19, 14:23, fulfilled gradually through the work of Darius, Cyrus,
Xerxes, and other conquerors); Tyre being attacked by many nations and its stones,
timber, and soil being cast into the sea (predicted in Ezekiel 26:3-12, fulfilled in attacks
by Babylon and Alexander the Great); Edom being toppled and humbled (predicted in
Jeremiah 49:17, fulfilled after the city was conquered by the Nabataeans); Old Testament
prophecies that accurately predicted the coming Messiah that Jesus fulfilled through his
birth, ministry, death, resurrection, and role in the church.
6. List the ancient non-biblical writings that confirm the historicity of Jesus and the
teaching of the early Christians.
Josephus, the Talmud, Tacitus, Pliny the Younger
7. Describe the role of eyewitness testimony and the church fathers in affirming the
accuracy of the Gospels.
Because the Gospels were written by eyewitnesses to Jesus life and ministry, we can be
confident in their authoritative and accurate accounts. Also, the Gospels were written early
enough to be confirmed by other eyewitnesses living at the time. Those who studied under
the apostles and other church leaders are called the church fathers. Their writings closely
mirror the New Testament, confirming the New Testament's accuracy and authenticity.
8. Explain how the Dead Sea Scrolls and many available early New Testament
manuscripts confirm the accurate preservation of the biblical writings.
The Dead Sea Scrolls confirm the accurate copying of the Old Testament, specifically
because its copy of the book of Isaiah is identical to newer copies that were written
thousands of years later. The large number of early New Testament manuscripts and
fragments allow us to confidently reconstruct the original manuscripts. The 25,000 early
manuscripts and fragments available today come from five different document families.
The mistakes contained in them are mainly spelling, word order, and grammar differences
or minor deletions or additions, none of which affect any doctrine of the Christian faith.
9. Briefly appraise and formulate responses to the three common objections to the
reliability and authority of the Bible.
Objection 1: The Bible was written by human beings. First, establish whether humans are
capable of saying or writing anything that is true or accurate. If so, it is possible that the
Bible does not have mistakes in it. Assuming God exists, he is capable of using humans to
write down exactly what he wants. The Bible describes the origin of Scripture as a process
that is both human and divine. Except when God gave specific messages to the writers, he
did not dictate what they wrote or override their personalities, though he did inspire them
to write his authoritative Word and communicate God's truth in their own writing styles.
The authors did not write their own personal ideas about God, but rather submitted to the
inspiration of the Holy Spirit.
CHAPTER 3 | 65


<!-- page-12 (book p.3) -->

CH
Lesson 9:
Study
Guide
(continued)
66 | CHAPTER 3
Objection 2: The Bible has been corrupted. Access to an immense number of
New Testament manuscripts gives us ample evidence to compare any copying
mistakes and determine whether the manuscripts have been corrupted or
changed over time. The number of textual variants is high because the number
of manuscripts is high. The majority of textual variants are minor, such as
spelling errors, unclear readings, and obviously questionable alterations to some
manuscripts. Variants must change the meaning of the text to be of concern. Of
the less than 4,000 variants that have any significance for the meaning of the
text, none affect core doctrines
Objection 3: Important books have been left out of the Bible. The 52 lost
gospels that skeptics claim were left out of the Bible by church leaders due
to political or doctrinal preferences are gnostic texts with messages that differ
greatly from the New Testament books. Three criteria evaluate these books:
apostolicity (written by apostles), orthodoxy (consistent with the teachings of
earliest Christianity), and pedigree (widely accepted by the early church). The
gnostic texts fail all three tests and can be confidently excluded from the canon.
10. Summarize five areas of life that are under God's authority, and classify
daily activities into those five categories.
God has authority over culture (includes values and morals); God has authority
over governments (including all nations and government officials); God has
authority over knowledge (including science and other academic interests); God
has authority over our emotions (truth over feelings); God has authority over
entertainment (including celebrities and others we listen to).
11. Describe the importance of examining and evaluating all truth claims.
Everyone follows somebody. Everyone has an authority, whether they recognize
it or not. Many authorities, including celebrities, make truth claims with little
other reason beyond "because I said so." Accepting someone else's claims without
question while rejecting our God-instituted authorities is merely to exchange
one authority for another. Christians should carefully evaluate claims made by
authorities to see if they are true. Asking questions is a good thing and can help
us effectively evaluate the claims of authorities to see if they are objectively true.
12. Explain why God wants people to obey him.
God wants us to accept his authority over our lives because he knows we can
only find true life in him and flourish through obeying his ways.
13. What are the Dead Sea Scrolls, and what is their importance?
The Dead Sea Scrolls are the oldest surviving collection of Jewish canonical texts;
they were found in Qumran in 1947. They were written 300-400 years before
the birth of Christ, and the collection's copy of Isaiah predates the next oldest
available copy by nearly 1,000 years. The Dead Sea Scrolls proved the accurate
copying of the Old Testament books over time.
14. What are textual variants? Explain their significance to the Bible.
Textual variants are differences between particular words, phrases, or passages
within multiple copies of the same ancient manuscript. Many skeptics say
textual variants challenge the accuracy of the Bible, but this isn't accurate. Most textual
variants are minor spelling and word order differences, unclear readings, or uses of
synonyms. There are some obviously questionable alterations of some manuscripts, though
none affect core doctrines.
15. Are the lost gospels part of the Bible? If not, explain what they are.
No. The lost gospels are gnostic texts that were excluded from the canon because they were
not written by the apostles, not widely accepted by the earliest Christians, and did not
communicate the same message as the rest of the New Testament books. They contained
gnostic ideas, which were heresies and not orthodox Christian doctrines.
16. What is gnosticism?
Gnosticism is a heresy that affected the early church and taught that the material world was
inherently evil. Gnosticism also taught that the world was made by a lesser divine being,
that Jesus appearing in a body would have corrupted his ministry, and that salvation can be
obtained only through self-denial and esoteric knowledge of divine reality. Some gnostics
taught that Jesus was merely a spirit who appeared to be human.
17. Explain the difference between internal evidence and external evidence in relation
to the reliability of the Bible.
Internal evidence demonstrates what the Bible claims about itself and what the intended
message of the writers was, according to their own claims. The internal evidence shows
that the writers believed they were sharing God's authoritative revelation. The fact that all
the biblical authors (writing in different times and places) manage to teach a consistent
message makes their claims to be speaking God's Word much more believable. Internal
evidence does not by itself prove the authority of Scripture but does present evidence that
can be corroborated by external evidence. External evidence comes from sources outside
of the Bible, such as non-biblical ancient historical sources, archaeological discoveries, and
fulfilled prophecies. External evidence proves the historical and prophetic accuracy of the
Bible, giving us strong reason to accept the authority of the Scriptures.
18. What is radical individualism, and how does it compare with the Christian
relationship to authority?
Radical individualism is the attitude that no one can tell an individual person what to do.
It represents a rejection of authority, whether legitimate or illegitimate. Christians submit
to God's authority over their lives. Christians also submit to other authorities set in place
by God, although Christians obey God over human authorities when the two conflict.
19. Who affirmed the authority of the apostle Paul's writings?
The apostle Peter affirmed the authority of the apostle Paul's writings.
20. Explain why some people resist God's authority.
Some people resist God's authority because they had bad experiences with human
authorities or have been abused by them. Some people resist God's authority because they
think God just wants to control them or ruin their fun. Some people resist God's authority
because they have embraced the attitude that no one can tell them what to do.
21. Read and study the four Key Verses listed at the beginning of the study guide.
CHAPTER 3 | 67
g Does the Bible Have Authority?


<!-- page-13 -->

CH
Chapter 3
Test P
Distribute TR 3.10A Chapter 3 Test to each student and allow
time for them to complete the exercises. Students who finish
early may start reading Chapter 4. Assign homework.
Notes
How to Read
the Bible
68 | CHAPTER 3
FOUNDATIONS G
