# Chapter 4

<!-- page-1 -->

CH
Chapter 3
Test P
Distribute TR 3.10A Chapter 3 Test to each student and allow
time for them to complete the exercises. Students who finish
early may start reading Chapter 4. Assign homework.
Notes
How to Read
the Bible
68 | CHAPTER 3


<!-- page-2 (book p.2) -->

How to Read the Bible
Chapter 4 Syllabus
Lesson
REVIEW
WATCH
REVIEW FOR
STUDY FOR
GIVE
Assignment
Chapter 3 Test
Questions for Chapter 4.1-4.2
Activity: According to God's Word
Chapter 4.3-4.4
Questions for Chapter 4.3-4.4
Questions for Chapter 4.3-4.4
Activity: Self-Centered or God-Centered?
Chapter 4.5-4.6
Questions for Chapter 4.5-4.6
Questions for Chapter 4.5-4.6
Activity: Common Mistakes in Bible
Reading
Chapter 4.7-4.8
Questions for Chapter 4.7-4.8
Questions for Chapter 4.7-4.8
Activity: Steps to Reading the Bible Well
Chapter 4.9-4.10
Questions for Chapter 4.9-4.10
Questions for Chapter 4.9-4.10
Activity: Historic Journals
Activity: Bible Reading and Study
Videos
Video Questions
Video Questions
Activity: Ad to Promote Bible Reading
Study Guide Questions
Chapter 5.1-5.2
Questions for Chapter 5.1-5.2
*Student Textbook (ST) Student Manual (SM)
A full-year syllabus is available in the online resources.
70 | CHAPTER 4
Page
72-73
ST 51-53
SM 68-69
ST 53-56
SM 70-71
76-77
ST 56-59
SM 72-73
78-79
ST 59-61
SM 74-75
SM 76-78
83-85
SM 81-83
87-89
ST 62-65
SM 86
Chapter 4
OVERVIEW
The Bible can be hard to understand. It
was written in ancient times, in foreign
languages, to people in a cultural context
very different from ours today. Yet the Bible
is the most important book of all time.
Though many people do not often read it
today, as Christians we must learn how to
read and study it daily. Studying the Bible
is a lifelong journey that has many spiritual
benefits.
Postmodernism has affected the
study of the Bible. Instead of recognizing
its divine Authors intended meaning,
postmodernists hold that all interpretations
are equally valid. Besides this, people often
make five common mistakes: they assume
the Bible does not need to be interpreted,
that its meaning applies uniquely to them,
that passages that do not fit their theology
can be ignored or distorted, that the
context of a Bible passage does not matter,
and that the Bible must be interpreted
based on contemporary standards.
Several steps can help us to read the
Bible well. They include choosing a good
Bible translation; determining the content
of a verse, passage, or book; understanding
the historical and literary context; looking
for relationships between a passage and
other parts of the Bible; using Bible helps;
and seeking to respond to what we read.
Ways to internalize what we learn in
Scripture include journaling, sharing it
with others, and seeking to apply it our
lives.
Scripture study can also raise many
questions and doubts, so we should seek
help from others. Remember that God
works to shape us into the image of his
Son. God's Word transforms us!
5 How to Read the Bible
PREPARATION
Lesson 1:
For the activity on Lesson 6, obtain
Bible study resources such as
study Bibles, commentaries, and
concordances.
Lesson 3:
Print a copy of TR 4.3A Common
Mistakes in Bible Reading for each
group of four or five students. Print a
copy of the Answer Key for yourself.
Lesson 5:
Print a copy of TR 4.5A Historic
Journals for each student.
Lesson 6:
Review PS 4.6A Bible Reading and
Study to become familiar with the
presentation. Print a copy of TR 4.6A
Armor of God for every student. You
will need the Bible study resources
you collected.
Access and preview the videos listed
on Lesson 7. See the inside back cover
of this manual for instructions to
stream videos.
Print a copy of TR 4.10A Chapter 4
Test for each student.
LESSON MATERIALS
Presentation Slides
PS 4.6A Bible Reading and Study
PS 4.8A Chapter 4 Review
Teacher Resources
TR 4.3A Common Mistakes in Bible Reading
TR 4.5A Historic Journals
TR 4.6A Armor of God
TR 4.10A Chapter 4 Test
CHAPTER 4 | 71


<!-- page-3 (book p.4) -->

CH
Lesson 1:
4.1-4.2 p
Review Chapter 3 Test. Have
students turn to page 48 in
their student textbook. Read
the objectives to the class. Go
over the Discussion Questions
for Chapter 4.1-4.2 on pages
66-67 in the student manual.
According to God's Word in
their student manual. Assign the
homework. If time allows, have
students begin reading Chapter
4.3-4.4.
determine how not to do a
Bible study. [4.1]
• Students will be able to infer
the necessity of personal
Bible reading. [4.2]
72 | CHAPTER 4
1. What problems do you see with how the students are reading
the Bible in the illustration? [4.1]
A mistake the students make is ignoring the context of Bible
verses. Sophia thinks that Jeremiah 29:11 is all about how God
has a specific plan for her life. Chloe takes Matthew 18:20 out
of context to say that God has been present in their Bible study.
Several students assume that a Bible verse can mean different things
to different people and that everyone can be equally right. Jacob
assumes that God is showing them new things that no one has ever
seen before. He thinks that the Bible is primarily about us. Sophia
says that there's no point in praying about Scripture, ignoring the
role of the Holy Spirit in helping us study and interpret the Bible.
2. How have you seen similar problems in Bible studies with
your peers? If you were to lead a Bible study, what might you
do to minimize or address such problems? [4.1]
3. What makes the Bible difficult to understand and apply? [4.1]
The Bible is an ancient book. It was originally written in the Greek
and Hebrew languages. Its various parts were written in cultural
contexts that are very different from ours, so it can be difficult to
get its full meaning. Though the Bible was written for us, it was not
written specifically to us. Therefore, we must work hard to learn
about its people, the situations they faced, and how it is relevant to
us today.
4. What impact did the invention of the printing press have on
Bible reading? [4.2]
In the past, few people had access to Bibles. Books were expensive
luxury items that only the rich could afford. In addition, many
people could not read. Once the printing press was invented, it
was possible for books to be reproduced quickly in large quantities.
During the Protestant Reformation, the printing press helped spread
the ideas of the reformers. The reformers wanted Christians to have
access to the Bible in their own language. By lowering the cost of
books, the printing press helped that dream become a reality for
many people. Today, the Bible is one of the best-selling books of all
time.
5. Were you surprised by the statistics on Bible reading? Why or
why not? How do you think a Bible reading plan might affect
the way people think and make choices in their lives? Have you
ever used a Bible reading plan? If so, what was it like? [4.2]
6. Why was the statement "Pick it up and read it" so powerful for
Augustine? [4.2]
The statement was powerful for Augustine because he took it as a sign to
read the Bible. When he finally began to read it, God showed him his sin,
so Augustine repented and gave his life to Christ.
ACCORDING TO GOD'S WORD
Students will identify the
1. Have students turn to Psalm 119. Explain that this
benefits of Bible reading
psalm is divided into 22 sections, and each section
according to Psalm 119.
corresponds with a letter of the Hebrew alphabet.
2. Assign a section of the psalm to each student. If two
• Materials needed: Bible,
paper, and pen
10-15 minutes
students have the same section, they may work
together.
3. Direct students to read their section and identify any
benefits it suggests come from studying God's Word.
Allow up to five minutes for this task.
4. Invite students to share the answers they found. If
desired, write the list on the board.
CHAPTER 4 | 73


<!-- page-4 (book p.4) -->

CH
Lesson 2:
4.3-4.4
Questions for Chapter
4.3-4.4. Have students turn
to Activity: Self-Centered or
God-Centered? in their student
Divide class into three groups.
Assign the homework.
distinguish various benefits
of studying God's Word.
[4.3]
give examples of how
postmodernism has affected
the study of the Bible. [4.4]
14 CHAPTER 4
1. Explain why people never "arrive" in their study of Scripture.
[4.3]
None of us will ever get to the point where we understand all of
the Bible perfectly and no longer need to learn anything about it.
Inevitably, we will make mistakes, misinterpret things, or allow
our own ideas to influence our understanding of Scripture. As we
mature, our understanding will change and grow. Even Paul, one of
the most learned and influential Christians of all time, didn't think
he had it all figured out. He continued studying to his dying day.
2. How is considering the study of Scripture as a lifelong journey
good news? [4.3]
It is good news because it means we do not stop growing in wisdom,
knowledge, and understanding. This perspective helps us stay
humble, recognizing our limitations and continual need for growth.
3. Is it wrong to ask, "What does this mean to me?" when it
comes to the Bible? Why or why not? [4.4]
It is not wrong to ask what a Bible text means to us, because the
Bible is a living book that has power to transform us and is relevant
to our lives today. We do not read it only as an academic or historical
exercise, but to understand what God wants to communicate and
how it applies to our lives without taking verses out of context.
4. What is postmodernism, and how does it relate to the study of
the Bible? [4.4]
Postmodernism is a worldview that teaches that there is no defining
source for truth and reality and no universal truth. Postmodernist
view our experience as what determines our truth or reality.
Postmodern readings tend to focus on the reader's experience rather
than the author's intended meaning, so people can sideline the
author's meaning in favor or their own meanings. According to
postmodernism, even if you think you have found something true in
the Bible, it is not true for everyone. It's only true for you.
5. What are the dangers of reading the Bible with a postmodern
or self-centered approach? [4.4]
Since postmodern thinking says that all interpretations are equally
valid, we can basically make the Bible say anything we want it to say.
We don't have to concern ourselves with what God actually wanted
to communicate to us, but can use the Bible in any way we want.
Throughout history, people have inappropriately used Scripture
to justify their own ideas—for example, teaching that the Bible
supports slavery or that it is all about gaining health and wealth.
Such misapplications cannot be blamed on postmodernism, as they
were around before postmodernism. However, postmodernism
provides no grounds for us to say that any interpretation is wrong.
acdo
SELF-CENTERED OR GOD-CENTERED?
Students will tell a Bible
1. Explain that many Sunday school stories are presented
story from a self-centered
with a self-centered focus rather than a God-centered
focus and then from a God-
focus. For example, the story of Daniel in the Lions' Den
centered focus.
(Daniel 6:1-28) could be looked at with a self-centered
focus (Daniel did what was right, so God took care of
• Materials needed: Bible
15-20 minutes
him). The story could also be seen with a God-centered
focus (per Daniel 6:25-27, a decree was sent out so that
all people would learn about God).
2. Divide students into three groups. Assign one of the
following passages to each group:
• Group 1: David defeats Goliath (1 Samuel 17:1-58)
• Group 2: Solomon prays for wisdom (1 Kings 3:1-15
and 10:23-24)
• Group 3: The fiery furnace (Daniel 3:1-30)
3. Have groups discuss their assigned story, referring to
the Bible passages as needed. Half of each group will tell
the story from a self-centered view, and the other half
will tell it from a God-centered view. Then have groups
present their perspectives.
CHAPTER 4 | 75


<!-- page-5 -->

CH
Lesson 3:
4.5-4.6 P
Questions for Chapter 4.5-4.6.
Common Mistakes in Bible
Reading in their student
Have students work in groups
of four or five. Distribute a copy
of TR 4.3A Common Mistakes
in Bible Reading to each group.
Have a copy of the Answer
Key for yourself. Assign the
homework.
O Students will be able to
identify three common
mistakes that people make
when reading the Bible. [4.5]
explain two additional
common mistakes people.
make when reading the Bible.
[4.6]
stakes Answer Key TR4.14
76 | CHAPTER 4
1. Why does the Bible need to be interpreted? Why can't we just
read it? [4.5]
Theologians Gordon Fee and Douglas Stuart point out that
"whether one likes it or not, every reader is at the same time an
interpreter." Every person who reads is also trying to understand or
make sense out of what they are reading. There is no reading without
interpretation. All readers inevitably bring their own culture and
experience to the Bible. This can lead us into misinterpreting what
God actually intended to say.
2. Why is it a mistake to assume that the Bible applies uniquely
to us? [4.5]
While it is not wrong to ask what the Bible means for us today, it is
inappropriate to assume that it applies uniquely to us, because it was
not written to us. This does not mean that it has no meaning for us,
only that we must first consider what it meant to the people it was
written to. The Bible is not primarily about us. For this reason, we
should first consider what the Bible says before seeking to apply it to
our unique circumstances. The more we learn about who God is, the
more we will know about how we should live.
3. What are the potential dangers of reading the Bible through
the lens of a systematic theology? [4.5]
A systematic theology can be helpful for organizing and better
understanding the message of the Bible, but potential dangers
include ignoring verses that don't fit the system or altering the
meaning of a verse to make it fit. Second Timothy 3:16 says that
all Scripture is valuable and inspired, so we cannot ignore or alter
passages that dont seem to work with our theology. We must
approach the Bible with humility, making ourselves fit it, rather than
trying to make it fit us.
4. What is context, and why is it important for understanding
the Bible? [4.6]
Context is the historical background and literary setting of a text
that helps clarify its meaning. If we do not pay attention to it, we
may misinterpret a particular verse or passage. Many of the mistakes
that people make when interpreting the Bible are due to ignoring or
misunderstanding context. Fee and Stuart counsel, "A text cannot
mean what it never meant.... The true meaning of the biblical text
for us is what God originally intended it to mean when it was first
spoken." Therefore, the true meaning of a text is tied to its context.
5. What does it mean to say the Bible is eternally relevant and historically
particular? [4.6]
To say that the Bible is eternally relevant is to say that it speaks to all people at every
time and place. The truths of Scripture will still be relevant hundreds of years from
now and into eternity. To say that the Bible is historically particular is to say that it
was communicated in certain languages, times, and cultures. Since they may be very
different from our own language, time, and culture, applying certain parts of the
Bible to our modern context can be difficult.
Note: The eternal relevance of Scripture is often revealed in analogous application,
which first considers what a text meant to its audience and then asks how the
situation they were dealing with is analogous (or similar to) our own. For example,
the ceremonial laws of the Old Testament were given to the people of Israel,
revealing God's desire to form the Israelites into a holy nation, a kingdom of
priests to be a light to the nations. Christians today are not required to observe the
ceremonial laws (Acts 15:28-29), but they are called to be a holy people, shining "as
lights in the world" (Philippians 2:15).
COMMON MISTAKES IN BIBLE READING
Students will analyze
1. Distribute TR 4.3A Common Mistakes in Bible Reading.
Scripture in view of five
2. Have students work with a partner to discuss the
common mistakes made in
Bible reading.
answers to the questions. Bibles will be needed for
some exercises.
3. Have students share their answers. Use the Answer
Key for help with answers as needed.
TR 4.3A and Bible
15-20 minutes
CHAPTER 4
5 How to Read the Bible


<!-- page-6 (book p.4) -->

CH
Lesson 4:
4.7-4.8
Questions for Chapter 4.7-4.8.
Steps to Reading the Bible
Well in their student manual.
Read the directions. Assign the
homework.
explain the first three of
seven steps to reading the
Bible well. [4.7]
O Students will be able to
describe the remaining four
steps to reading the Bible
well. [4.8]
1. What is exegesis? [4.7]
Exegesis is the exposition or explanation of a text based on careful
study and analysis. It is what you can get out of a text, based on the
Greek begeisthai, meaning to lead, and the prefix ex-, or out of.
Note: The opposite of exegesis is eisegesis, using the Greek prefix
eis-, meaning into, which refers to reading our own ideas, biases, or
cultural assumptions into a text.
2. What are three different types of Bible translations, and how
do they differ from one another? [4.7]
The three types of Bible translations are formal equivalence
translations, functional or dynamic equivalence translations, and free
translations or paraphrases. A formal equivalence translation seeks
to preserve, as much as possible, the form-both the words and
the grammar—of the original language. A functional or dynamic
equivalence translation seeks to keep the meaning of the original
language by using words and idioms in the target language that
communicate what the original said. A free translation or paraphrase
seeks to render the meaning of the original text in ways that sound
contemporary and fluid.
3. What is the difference between historical context and literary
context? [4.7-4.8]
Historical context pays attention to the time, place, culture, and
audience of a text. It involves the why, when, and where details of
a passage. Literary context, in contrast, pays attention to genre,
structure, and grammar. It considers the author's writing style,
imagery, and use of literary devices, such as alliteration or hyperbole.
4. Why is it so important to understand the genre of a biblical
book? Illustrate your answer by giving two examples using
Bible verses in different genres. [4.8]
Bible verse examples will vary. It is important to understand
the genre of a book because the Bible includes poetry, historical
narratives, laws, prophecies, psalms, proverbs, parables, epistles, and
apocalyptic literature, and each genre has its own rules. For example,
the Psalms are poems that use figurative language. When Psalm
84:11 declares that "the LORD God is a sun and shield," it does not
mean that God is a literal star and some kind of barrier or defensive
equipment. Proverbs, in contrast to Psalms, are wise sayings which
describe general truths. When Proverbs 22:6 says, "Train up a child
in the way he should go; even when he is old he will not depart from
it," this is not a contract or guarantee that a well-trained child will
never go astray. Rather, it describes what generally happens when a
child is raised properly.
78 | CHAPTER4
5. What three things should a good commentary supply? [4.8]
According to Fee and Stuart, a good commentary should supply historical
information and helps, answers to many content questions, and discussions of the
possible meanings of difficult texts. The best commentaries explore theological issues
and provide the arguments in support of various perspectives rather than proposing
only what the author prefers.
6. What is the difference between a descriptive and a prescriptive passage? What
are some examples of each? [4.8]
A descriptive passage describes what happened, while a prescriptive passage
prescribes what should have or ought to happen. Some descriptive passages include
the stories of God delivering the people of Israel from slavery in Egypt (Exodus), the
record of the kings of Israel (1-2 Kings, 1-2 Chronicles), and the book of Acts. In
contrast, prescriptive passages include the Ten Commandments (Exodus 20:2-17),
the Beatitudes (Matthew 5:1-16), and the Great Commission (Matthew 28:16-20).
STEPS TO READING THE BIBLE WELL
Students will present
steps to reading the Bible
1. Divide the class into seven groups and assign each
well.
group one of the seven steps to reading the Bible
well from Chapter 4.7-4.8. Each group will create
a two-minute skit to illustrate the step.
student textbook
20-25 minutes
2. Group members should assign roles to each
student in their group and practice the skit.
3. Have groups present their skits to the class.
CHAPTER 4 | 79


<!-- page-7 (book p.4) -->

CH
Lesson 5:
4.9-4.10
P
Read the objective to the
Questions for Chapter 4.9-4.10.
Historic Journals in their student
Have students work in pairs and
distribute a copy of TR 4.5A
Historic Journals to each pair.
OBJECTIVE
• Students will be able to list
three ways to apply what they
learn in Bible study. [4.9]
80 CHAPTER 4
1. How does the Holy Spirit help us as we read Scripture? 14.91
The Holy Spirit is present in all Christians to lead and guide us
into truth. "For all who are led by the Spirit of God are sons of
God" (Romans 8:14). He helps us to apply Scripture to our lives,
prompting us to listen to, remember, and obey God's Word.
2. What does it mean to be "doers of the word" (James 1:22)?
[4.9]
To be "doers of the word" means to do more than simply read it; it
means to put what we learn into practice in our daily lives, through
the empowerment of the Holy Spirit.
3. What are three ways to become a doer of the word? [4.9]
Three ways to become a doer of the word include journaling what
you are learning in Scripture, talking to others about what you learn,
and doing what Scripture commands.
4. Do believers experience doubt? Explain. [4.10]
Yes. Scripture and church history give examples of believers who
had doubts. There will be times when God will seem distant or
we may wonder about something God does or allows in Scripture.
Not all doubt leads to unbelief. Doubt can spur us on to ask better
questions and to engage in deeper, more careful thinking about God.
Handled in this way, doubts can lead to a more mature faith.
5. What should Christians do with their doubts? [4.10]
When a Christian has doubts, he or she should not ignore or hide
them but look for help from a pastor, teacher, or mentor. God does
not require us to handle our doubts alone; he placed us in a body of
believers so we can help each other grow.
HISTORIC JOURNALS
Students will compare
1. Distribute TR 4.5A Historic Journals to each student.
autobiographical excerpts
Allow students a few moments to read TR 4.5A.
to assess the value of
2. Have students identify at least four benefits of
writing what they are
keeping a record of one's spiritual life. Inform students
learning from Scripture and
they can make their notes on the back of the TR.
in their walk with Christ.
3. Allow students to discuss their findings with the class.
TR 4.5A and pencil
10-15 minutes
CHAPTER 4 | 81


<!-- page-8 -->

CH
Lesson 6:
Use PS 4.GA Bible Reading
and Study to lead students
through the activity. Have
copies of TR 4.6A Armor of
God ready.
OBJECTIVE
© Students will be able to
discuss reasons to read and
study the Bible and will
analyze a passage of Scripture
using the methods presented
in Chapter 4.
PREPARATION
• Materials needed: PS
4.6A, TR 4.6A, timer,
Bible, assorted Bible study
resources, paper, and pencil
• Time required: 45-50
minutes
RASA Armor of Gor
82 | CHAPTER 4
BIBLE READING AND STUDY
1. Divide the class into three groups. Ask each group to
designate a secretary to write the group's answers
in brainstorming exercises and a spokesperson to
summarize their group's conclusions.
2. Display PS 4.6A Bible Reading and Study. Show slide 1.
Set the timer for two minutes. Have students complete
the first brainstorming exercise.
3. Show slide 2 and go over the answers. As you read
through the benefits, have each secretary cross out
those items from his or her group's list. Have the
spokespersons share any additional reasons identified
by their group.
4. Show slide 3. Set the timer for three minutes. Have
students complete the second brainstorming exercise.
Then show slide 4 and discuss the answers. Read the
rest of the slide, emphasizing the key terms.
5. Show and read slide 5. Distribute TR 4.6A Armor of God
to students. Encourage students to keep their own
notes as they study. Explain that you will go over study
results in class. Point out the Bible study resources
and, if necessary, briefly demonstrate how to use them.
Set the timer. Have groups begin their reading and
study of Ephesians 6:10-20.
6. Display and read slides 6-12. Call on different students
to answer the questions on the slides.
Videos P
In this lesson, students will view
seven videos featuring Christian
educators and authors. Each expert
answers a specific worldview or
apologetics question. These videos
will allow students to expand their
knowledge and provide biblical
answers to thought-provoking
questions. The following videos
will be used in today's lesson:
1. How Can We Communicate
Truth in Our Culture?
(McDowell, 1:39)
2. Why Should We Consider the
Bible an Authority? (McDowell,
1:27)
3. What Causes the Bible to Often
Be Misunderstood? (Paauw,
1:40)
4. How Can the Church
Encourage Healthy Biblical
Engagement? (Paauw, 1:31)
5. Developing Healthy Habits
around Personal Bible Study
(Paauw, 1:43)
6. Students Share Why the Bible Is
Important (PragerU.com, 3:12)
7. Facing our Doubts as Christians
(Kunkle, 1:27)
Play the videos in the order listed
above. Before each video, direct
students to read the questions in
their student manual. During and
after the video has been shown,
students will write their answers to
the Discussion Questions. Go over
the questions for the first video.
Play the next video. Continue until
the last video has been played and
questions have been discussed.
How to Read the Bible
• Video 1:
How Can We Communicate Truth in Our Culture?
1. What example shows we live in a culture where truth has
become relative?
People often say, "Well, that's your truth, but it is not mine."
Note: Postmodernism teaches that all you can know is your own
truth, and that there really is no ultimate truth to discover in the
world.
2. How do we know that truth matters to people?
Because people are made in God's image, they know in their hearts
that truth matters. Even someone who asks why truth matters is
presupposing that it does, in fact, matter.
Note: When people are given a choice, they want true answers rather
than false ones. They also try to live their lives based on what they
think is true.
3. What strategy can be used to converse with people who are
relativists?
We can try to get people to see they are already saying or acting as if
they believe truth matters.
4. How does the content of this video relate to the Bible study
gone wrong in Chapter 4.1?
Some of the students who took part in A Bible Study Gone Wrong
made relativist statements. Sophia said that Jeremiah 29:11 "means
what it means to me, and it means what it means to you." Susannah
said that everyone could be right about the meaning of the verse.
Video 2:
Why Should We Consider the Bible an Authority?
1. How is the Bible different from other books, such as those
written by Shakespeare or Aristotle?
The Bible is inspired, written by persons inspired by God. It is
unlike other ancient books in that Scripture claims inspiration for
itself.
2. What arguments are given for believing the Bible is true?
The Bible is historically reliable and has accurate accounts of Jesus'
life, miracles, and fulfilled prophecies.
CHAPTER 4 | 83


<!-- page-9 (book p.4) -->

CH
Videos
(continued)
3. How did Jesus treat Scripture?
Jesus repeatedly referred to Scripture and treated it as authoritative.
Note: If Jesus is God, and he treated the Scriptures this way, we should treat
them likewise.
•
Video 3
What Causes the Bible to Often Be Misunderstood?
1. Why is it so easy for people to misunderstand the Bible?
The reason it is easy to misunderstand the Bible is that while the Bible is for
us, but it was not written directly to us. It was not written to answer modern
questions; we live in a different time. We cannot act like it is a reference book
with answers for our lives today.
2. What is the first step of the two-step process the speaker shared to help
readers understand the Bible?
The first step is to determine what the passage meant to its original audience.
3. What is the second step of the process?
Once we understand what the Bible meant to its original audience, we can then
see how to apply its message to our lives today.
Video 4:
How Can the Church Encourage Healthy Biblical Engagement?
1. What is a Scripture McNugget®?
A Scripture McNugget® is a verse or a couple of verses of the Bible, often taken
out or context.
2. Should Christians live on a diet of Scripture McNuggets®? Why or why
not?
Christians should not live on a diet of Scripture McNuggets® because God
intended for us to read the Bible as it was given, in whole books and not as bits
and pieces.
3. What are some common Scripture McNuggets® you see today?
Answers will vary but may include Jeremiah 29:11 and Matthew 18:19-20,
referenced in A Bible Study Gone Wrong and in chapter 4.6.
Video 5:
Developing Healthy Habits around Personal Bible Study
1. What is the difference between Bible reading and Bible study?
Bible reading helps you understand the story of the Bible as a whole. Bible
study helps you understand what a specific passage means in its context within a
specific book of the Bible and in relation to the whole story of the Bible.
2. What books of the Bible have you read in their entirety?
• Video 6:
Students Share Why the Bible Is Important
1. What reasons do students give for considering the Bible important?
Possible answers: The Bible is a God-given guide for us to know how to live our
lives. You can find God through the Bible. The Bible teaches us that even the
worst sinner can have salvation in Christ and a relationship with God. The Bible
is the single most important book in all of Western civilization. The Bible has
affected every single person on Earth, whether they know it or not.
2. What additional reasons could you give for considering the Bible
important?
Answers will vary but may include that Jesus and his disciples considered the
Bible important and we should follow his example, that God commands us to
study the Word, and that reading the Bible brings many spiritual benefits (see
Chapter 4.3).
3. A student shares her favorite Bible verse. Which verse is it?
Romans 8:18, NIV: "I consider that our present sufferings are not worth
comparing with the glory that will be revealed in us."
• Video 7:
Facing Our Doubts as Christians
1. Reading and study of the Bible can sometimes cause people to experience
doubt. The speaker describes three causes of doubt. What are they?
Some doubt is intellectual, caused by unanswered questions. Some doubt is
emotional or psychological, due to hurt, pain, anger, or bitterness. Some doubt
is moral, stemming from a conflict between God's Word and the way we are
living.
2. How should you deal with each kind of doubt?
If doubt is intellectual, look for answers in apologetics, commentaries, and other
sources. If doubt is emotional, ask other people and God for help to deal with
the underlying pain. If it is moral, confess it to God and to others.
84 | CHAPTER 4
9 How to Read the Bible
CHAPTER 4 | 85


<!-- page-10 -->

CH
Lesson 8:
and
Review
Ad to Promote Bible Reading
in their student manual. Read
the directions. Display PS 4.8A
Chapter 4 Review to help
students review the chapter.
PS4BA Chapter & Revier
councanons
CHAP CR
AD TO PROMOTE BIBLE READING
Students will design a full-page advertisement or make
a thirty-second commercial encouraging people to
read Scripture.
• Materials needed: Bible, markers, and large paper
• Time required: 20-30 minutes
1. Divide the class into five groups.
2. Assign one set of Bible verses to each group:
• Group 1: Psalm 1:1-2, Ezra 7:10, Romans 15:4
• Group 2: John 20:30-31, Acts 8:35, Colossians 3:16
• Group 3: Joshua 1:8, 2 Peter 3:1-2, Acts 17:11
• Group 4: Proverbs 30:5, Revelation 1:3, Luke 4:16
• Group 5: Psalm 37:31, Psalm 40:8, Matthew 7:24
3. Have each group determine how its assigned verses
encourage people to read the Bible today. Then,
have each group brainstorm how to express this
encouragement to teenagers.
4. Students should decide whether to design a print
advertisement or create a commercial to persuade
teenagers to read the Bible. Provide markers
and large paper to groups that design a print
advertisement.
5. Have groups present the ad or commercial to the
class.
Lesson 9:
Study
Guide
Allow students to study for the
Chapter 4 Test. Have them turn
to the Study Guide in their
student manual and complete the
exercises.
Key Terms
postmodernism
hermeneutics
context
exegesis
historical context
literary context
Key Verses
2 Timothy 2:15
2 Timothy 3:16-17
James 1:22
1 Thessalonians 2:13
FOUNDATIONS 9
1. How should you not do a Bible study?
You should not do Bible study without paying attention to its
context. You should not read the Bible relying only on your own
desires and cultural understandings.
2. Why is personal Bible reading necessary?
The Bible is the most important book of all time. It is valuable to
the 2.5 billion people who profess to be Christians. Even though the
Bible is popular, many people do not read it. But an unread Bible is
like kindling without a match; we must read it for it to transform us.
An example of the way Scripture can transform a life is Augustine,
who picked up a Bible after hearing a child chant "Tolle lege." He
read it, became convinced of his own sinfulness, gave his life to
Christ, and served him ever after.
3. What are the different benefits of studying God's Word?
The Bible promises many benefits for those who read it, including
blessing, insight into how to bear spiritual fruit, freedom from
spiritual bondage, direction in life, and the ability to grasp truth and
defeat error.
4. In what ways has postmodernism affected the study of the
Bible?
The way postmodernism has affected the study of the Bible is that
many people approach the Bible as if it were written for them
personally. Instead of considering the Author's intent, they feel
free to invent their own meanings for a text, and the meanings do
not have to be true for anyone else because they believe there is no
ultimate reality.
5. What are five common mistakes people make when reading
the Bible?
The common mistakes that people make when reading the Bible are
to assume that the Bible does not need to be interpreted, that the
Bible applies uniquely to them, and that they can ignore passages
that do not fit their theology. They may also take the Bible out of
context and interpret the Bible based on contemporary standards.
6. Explain the seven steps to reading the Bible well.
A first step in reading the Bible well is choosing an accurate
translation. The second step is understanding the content of a
passage by asking questions about it. The third step is understanding
the historical context of the passage you are reading; the historical
CHAPTER 4 | 87


<!-- page-11 (book p.4) -->

CH
Lesson 9:
Study
Guide
(continued)
context is the time, place, culture, and audience of a text. The fourth step is
understanding the literary context, or the genre, structure, and grammar of
a text. The fifth step is looking for relationships between the passage you are
reading and other parts of the Bible. The sixth step is using Bible helps, and the
seventh step is courageously pursuing a response to what you read.
7. What are three ways to apply what you learn in Bible study?
Three ways to apply what we learn in studying the Bible are to journal what we
learn, to share what we learned with others, and to live what we learn.
8. Why do most people find the Bible hard to understand?
Most people find the Bible hard to understand because it was written to people
who have been dead for thousands of years and in a cultural context and in
ancient languages that are totally foreign to most individuals in the West.
9. What are three kinds of translations? What does each type of translation
seek to do?
The three kinds of translations are formal equivalence translations, functional
or dynamic equivalence translations, and free translations or paraphrases. A
formal equivalence translation tries to keep the words and grammar of the
original. A functional or dynamic equivalence translation tries to do this too,
but it also adjusts idioms and grammar so that the translation will more easily
communicate the ideas of the original language. A free translation or paraphrase
does not focus on the exact words of the original language as much as on making
sure that the translation communicates the concepts.
10. How do commentaries help people understand the content and context
of Scripture?
Good commentaries provide information about the historical context of
Scripture. They also provide clarification on Hebrew and Greek terms, answer
questions on the content of many passages, and explain the different possibilities
and arguments for competing interpretations of difficult texts.
11. What is the difference between a descriptive and a prescriptive passage of
Scripture?
A descriptive passage describes things. It tells about people, places, and events
that happened in God's plan for redemption. A prescriptive passage prescribes
things; it is like a doctor's prescription you must take to get well. Prescriptive
passages give commands to be obeyed or values to be adopted.
12. What role does the Holy Spirit have in our reading of Scripture?
The Holy Spirit leads those who are children of God (Romans 8:14). He
motivates us to read God's Word, guides us to truth (John 16:13), and helps us
to apply it to our lives.
13. What should you do if you experience doubt when reading Scripture?
You should remember that many people experience the same thingeven people like the
apostle Thomas and the reformer Martin Luther. You should try to find answers to your
questions and difficulties by consulting commentaries and talking to people who know
Scripture.
14. Read and study the four Key Verses listed at the beginning of the study guide.
88 | CHAPTER 4
CHAPTER 4 | 89


<!-- page-12 (book p.4) -->

CH
Chapter 4
Test p
Distribute TR 4.10A Chapter 4 Test to each student and allow
time for them to complete the exercises. Students who finish
early may start reading Chapter 5. Assign homework.
Notes
The Bible as
a Story
90 | CHAPTER 4
FOUNDATIONS 9
