# Chapter 7

<!-- page-1 -->

CH
Lesson P
10:
Chapter 6
Test
Distribute TR 6.10A Chapter 6 Test to each student and allow
time for them to complete the exercises. Students who finish
early may start reading Chapter 7. Assign homework.
Notes
136 | CHAPTER 6


<!-- page-2 -->

Chapter 7 Syllabus
Lesson
REVIEW
WATCH
REVIEW FOR
STUDY FOR
GIVE
Assignment
Chapter 6 Test
Questions for Chapter 7.1-7.2
Activity: News Analyses
Chapter 7.3-7.4
Questions for Chapter 7.3-7.4
Questions for Chapter 7.3-7.4
Activity: Breaking News Story
Chapter 7.5-7.6
Questions for Chapter 7.5-7.6
Questions for Chapter 7.5-7.6
Activity: Original Sin Scriptures
Chapter 7.7-7.8
Questions for Chapter 7.7-7.8
Questions for Chapter 7.7-7.8
Activity: Genesis 3:15 Study
Chapter 7.9-7.10
Questions for Chapter 7.9-7.10
Questions for Chapter 7.9-7.10
Activity: Student Covenant
Activity: The Fall Charades
Videos
Video Questions
Video Questions
Activity: The Fall in Literature
Study Guide Questions
Chapter 8.1-8.2
Questions for Chapter 8.1-8.2
*Student Textbook (ST) Student Manual (SM)
A full-year syllabus is available in the online resources.
138 | CHAPTER7
Page
ST 94-96
SM 130-131
142-143
ST 96-99
SM 132-133
144-145
ST 99-101
SM 135-136
146-147
ST 101-104
SM 137-138
SM 139-140
151-153
SM 143-145
155-157
ST 105-108
SM 148-149
Chapter 7
OVERVIEW
Though the world and human beings were
created by God to be in a state of perfect
harmony, they are no longer in that state.
The Bible's metanarrative reveals how
creation came to be corrupted by evil,
broken by sin, and plagued by suffering.
What is sin? Three words the Bible uses
for this concept are sin, transgression, and
iniquity.
Genesis 3 tells the story of the fall,
showing how sin entered the world when
the first humans disobeyed God after the
serpent lied to Adam and Eve about the
fruit God had forbidden them to eat. The
fall had dire consequences. It impacted
Adam and Eve's relationships with
themselves, each other, God, and nature.
The consequences were both physical and
spiritual. They continue to affect us today.
However, Genesis 3 is not only about the
fall and its consequences. It also includes
God's gracious response to Adam and
Eve, including the Bible's first promise of
redemption.
Adam and Eve were sent out of the
garden of Eden. The effects of sin were
evident in the lives of their descendants
until there was so much evil that God sent
a flood to destroy all humans and all living
creatures except for those on the ark. After
the flood, God made a covenant with Noah
and his family to never destroy the earth
by flood again. Yet the flood did not stop
people from sinning. The people arrogantly
decided to build a tower to make a name
for themselves. God saw that nothing
would be impossible for them, and he
decided to confuse the peoples language.
Humans formed separate groups and spread
throughout the earth.
PREPARATION
Lesson 1:
Computers will be needed for this
Lesson 4:
Print a copy of TR 7.4A Genesis 3:15
Study for each student.
Lesson 5:
Preview PS 7.5A Student Covenant to
become familiar with the activity.
Lesson 6:
Print a copy of TR 7.6A Act 2: The
Fall Charades. Cut out the words and
phrases and place them in a bag.
Access and preview the videos listed
on Lesson 7. See the inside back cover
of this manual for video-streaming
instructions.
Lesson 8:
Computers will be needed for this
Lesson 10:
Print a copy of TR 7.10A Chapter 7
Test for each student.
LESSON MATERIALS
Presentation Slides
PS 7.5A Student Covenant
PS 7.8A Chapter 7 Review
Teacher Resources
TR 7.4A Genesis 3:15 Study
TR 7.6A Act 2: The Fall Charades
TR 7.10A Chapter 7 Test
CHAPTER 7 | 139


<!-- page-3 (book p.7) -->

CH
Lesson 1:
7.1-7.2 P
Review Chapter 6 Test. Have
students turn to page 91 in
their student textbook. Read the
objectives to the class. Go over
the Discussion Questions for
Chapter 7.1-7.2 on page 128
in the student manual. Have
students turn to Activity: News
Analyses. Read the directions.
Assign the homework.
compare the harmony of the
original creation with the
state of the world today [7.1]
explain the three words used
in the Bible for sin. [7.2]
140 CHAPTER 7
1. What is shalom? [7.1]
Shalom is a Hebrew word that means peace, harmony, wholeness,
completeness, prosperity, welfare, and tranquility. The world God
created was in a state of shalom; everything was good and in order.
2. What would you say is wrong with the world now? What is the
main problem? [7.1]
Answers will vary but may include social problems like poverty,
injustice, lack of education, and war; human character flaws like
greed, anger, pride, and selfishness; or the distortion of good
things like sex, money, power, and influence. While there are many
different opinions about what the world's biggest problem is, the
Bible argues that all of the evil in our world is the result of sin. Sin is
an intruder that has corrupted God's good world.
3. What ideas come into your mind when you hear the word sin?
[7.2]
Answers will vary but may include not following the rules, being
judged by other Christians for not acting or looking a certain way,
feeling guilty for making mistakes, and God spoiling peoples fun by
telling them not to do certain things.
Note: Help students talk through their ideas and dispel false notions
about sin (such as the above answers). Contrast false notions to the
biblical picture of sin provided in Chapter 7.2.
4. Describe sin, transgression, and iniquity—three of the words
for wrongdoing in the Bible. [7.2]
To sin is to miss the goal or fall short. God's goal for us is to be in
right relationship with him, ourselves, others, and all creation. Sin
is our failure to love as we should and broadly includes all types of
falling short of the goal. A transgression is an instance of rebellion
or breaking trust with another person. Lying, breaking promises,
betraying, and rebelling against God all fall into this category.
Iniquity is crooked, wicked, and perverse behavior. Pride, murder,
hypocrisy, sexual abuse, and malicious slander all fall into this
category.
LO20
• ПO22
NEWS ANALYSES
Students will analyze
news stories, classifying
them according to
the type of sin they
represent and the type of
relationship they impact.
computer, paper,
and pen
20-25 minutes
1. Divide the class into four groups. Assign each group
one of four relationships: God, ourselves, other
people, and creation.
2. In each group, have students use computers to search
for online news articles. Direct them to find one news
story that shows sin, transgression, or iniquity related
to their assigned relationship.
3. Students should read the article and summarize how
the sin affects the relationship assigned to them.
Allow 10-12 minutes for this step.
4. Have each group present its findings to the class.
CHAPTER7 | 141


<!-- page-4 (book p.7) -->

CH
Lesson 2:
7.3-7.4
Questions for Chapter 7.3-7.4.
Breaking News Story in their
student manual. Read the
directions. Have students work
in groups of four or five. Assign
the homework.
describe what the fall is and
how it happened. [7.3]
identify the physical and
spiritual consequences of the
fall in peoples relationship
with God and nature. [7.4]
142 | CHAPTER
1. What was the first sin? How was it more than breaking a rule?
[7.3]
The first sin is recorded in Genesis 3: Adam and Eve ate from the
Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil in disobedience to God's
command. The first sin was about more than simply breaking a rule.
Adam and Eve sinned by failing to love God, by rebelling against his
authority, and by rejecting his plans for them. They were not content
to be God's image-bearers and stewards; they wanted to be gods and
rule on their own terms.
2. How did the serpent tempt Eve? How does Satan tempt people
to sin? [7.3]
The serpent questioned what God said, casting doubt on God's
clear command. He told Eve that if she ate the fruit of the tree, the
exact opposite of what God had said would happen. She would not
die; rather, her eyes would be opened. The serpent suggested that
God was holding out on Eve and tried to convince her that God
was stingy and restrictive. Satan uses similar tactics to tempt people
today, casting doubt on God's character. Scripture reveals God as
personal, loving, and just. Satan suggests that God is impersonal,
vindictive, and unjust. If Satan can convince us that God is not to
be trusted, he will suggest that God's Word cannot be trusted either.
Satan wishes to corrupt us and disrupt our relationship with God.
3. Do you think it was wrong for Adam and Eve to seek
independence from God? Why or why not? [7.3]
Answers will vary. Independence may be a good thing. God wants us
to grow to maturity, which requires a level of independence. But too
much independence might make us think that we can define right
and wrong without God. By eating the forbidden fruit, Adam and
Eve expressed their wish for this kind of independence. People often
wish for independence from God when they have a false view of who
God is, thinking that God is selfish, egotistical, cruel, or dishonest.
Scripture reveals that God is good. He is the Creator and Source
of all life. He does not use his power or authority to oppress us but
seeks our good. Our dependence on God is fundamental to our
understanding of our relationship with him. When we acknowledge
this, we begin to grow into maturity as his image-bearers.
4. Is death natural or unnatural? Explain. [7.4]
According to the Bible, death is unnatural. It is an enemy and an
invader in God's world. God did not intend for us to experience
death. That is why Jesus wept at Lazarus' tomb even though he knew
that he would raise Lazarus back to life. Physical death happens to us
all, but this is not how it was supposed to be.
5. What is spiritual death? [7.4]
Spiritual death is the fracturing and distortion of our relationship with God. To
die spiritually is to experience all of the negative consequences of being separated
from God and the life he offers. The ultimate spiritual death is to be eternally
separated from God's presence.
6. How has humanity's relationship with God been fractured? What
evidence do you see of this in the world today? [7.4]
Humanity's relationship with God was fractured through Adam and Eve's sin.
Possible answers on the evidence for this in the world today include that people
fear, hate, mistrust, and reject God; ignore his standards of right and wrong;
claim power and authority that belong only to God; and worship idols.
7. How has humanity's relationship with nature been fractured? What
evidence do you see of this in the world today? [7.4]
God created humans to be stewards of creation, protecting it, cultivating it, and
bringing it to abundance. However, because of the fall, the ground was cursed
and work became frustrating. Possible answers may include that humans often
abuse, exploit, and destroy creation in service of their own needs. This happens
when humans mistreat animals, deplete soil for food production, and carelessly
pollute the world. These actions often lead to ecological disasters.
BREAKING NEWS STORY
Students will create a skit
1. Divide the class into groups of four to five students.
of a breaking news story
Have groups brainstorm how to present the fall as
about the fall.
breaking news in a newscast. Then have groups create
skits. Groups should decide who is going to report
or if they will take turns reporting. Then have them
• Materials needed: none
15-20 minutes
rehearse their skits.
2. Have each group present its news story skit to the
class. Allow time for students to discuss the most
effective points made from the presentations.
CHAPTER7 | 143


<!-- page-5 (book p.7) -->

CH
Lesson 3:
7.5-7.6
Questions for Chapter 7.5-7.6.
Original Sin Scriptures in
their student manual. Read the
directions. Have students work
in pairs. Assign the homework.
• Students will be able to infer
the consequences of the fall
in people's relationships with
themselves and with other
people. [7.5]
discuss the doctrine of
original sin and whether
God is to blame for peoples
sin. [7.6]
144 | CHAPTER 7
1. How has every person's relationship with his or her own self
been fractured? What evidence do you see of this in the world
today? [7.5]
God created people to be rightly ordered within themselves, living
out of the fullness of who God created them to be. However,
because of the fall, people are no longer comfortable in their own
skin. As evidence of this today, possible answers may include that
internal brokenness leads to anxiety, fear, and shame, causing people
to hate themselves, harm their bodies, or convince themselves of lies.
Unhappy with themselves, people seek to find their identity in who
or what they know, what they possess, or what they can accomplish.
This quest for fulfillment ends in even greater dissatisfaction.
2. How have people's relationships with others been fractured?
What evidence do you see of this in the world today? [7.5]
God created humans to be in life-giving relationships with
others (marriages, friendships, parent/child relationships, sibling
relationships, etc.), but sin has led to broken relationships. Instead of
being characterized by trust, honesty, unity, and peace, many human
relationships are now tainted with mistrust, dishonesty, rivalry, and
prejudice. The effects of the fall on relationships today can be seen in
numerous ways: in the way we talk to our parents, how we treat the
less-popular students in our school, or how we objectify someone we
are attracted to. Murder, adultery, slavery, racism, and abortion are
all obvious ways that humans fail to love one another.
3. Christopher Hitchens, an atheist, said: "Once you assume a
creator and a plan, it makes us objects in a cruel experiment
whereby we are created sick and commanded to be well." How
might you respond to his statement? [76]
Possible answer: In Hitchens' view, God is a cruel tyrant who creates
people sick, commands them to be well, and then punishes them
severely for failing to get well. But Hitchens statement is mistaken
in several ways. First, Genesis 1-2 says that humans were made in
God's image, and God said everything he created was "very good."
Second, humans were not "created sick" but made in God's image;
however, they have fallen through an act of rebellion. And third,
God does not command us to be well. Instead, Jesus offered his own
life for us on the cross so we might be healed.
4. What is the doctrine of original sin? [7.6]
The doctrine of original sin is the belief that Adam and Eve's first sin
corrupted the nature of their descendants. All humans are born with
a natural tendency toward sin. This does not simply mean making
mistakes, but rather rebelling against God. Every part of our lives
has been affected by sin, and there is nothing we can do on our own
to fix our sin problem.
5. Are humans basically good or evil? Explain. [7.6]
Humans are born with a sin nature and have a natural tendency to rebel against
God. No amount of education, training, or religious instruction can rid us of our
sin nature. So, there is a sense in which we can say that humans are basically evil,
but that is not the full picture. Genesis 1-2 says that humans were created in God's
image. This is fundamental to our understanding of who we are, and God is not
evil. Besides, God said that his creation, including human beings, was "very good."
Furthermore, Jesus was fully human. So, the problem is not that we are human; the
problem is that we have fallen into sin. Followers of Jesus are on a path to becoming
more human-that is, more like the perfect example of humanity, Christ. One day,
we will be totally freed from our sin nature.
ORIGINAL SIN SCRIPTURES
Students will discuss
and note observations in
Bible verses related to the
doctrine of original sin.
1. Reference the Bible verses (Romans 3:9-26, 5:12, Jeremiah
17:9, Psalm 14:1-3) cited in the student textbook. Each verse
supports the concept of human sinfulness and the doctrine
of original sin-that is, the belief that Adam and Eve's first sin
corrupted the nature of their descendants, including us! But
Bible and pen
15-20 minutes
there are many more verses in Scripture on these topics.
2. Have students to turn in their student manual to the Bible
Verses about Original Sin Study. Direct students to work with a
partner to discuss and make observations about each passage
listed. Guide pairs to spend 2-3 minutes on each verse. Students
may take brief notes on their discussion and observations in
their student manual.
3. Invite pairs to share what they discussed with the class.
BIBLE VERSES ABOUT ORIGINAL SIN STUDY
Job 14:4, 15:14-16
Psalm 51:5
Isaiah 53:6, 64:6
Mark 7:14-23
Ephesians 2:1-3
1 John 1:8-10
CHAPTER7 | 145


<!-- page-6 (book p.7) -->

CH
Lesson 4:
7.7-7.8
P
Questions for Chapter 7.7-
7.8. Have students turn to
Activity: Genesis 3:15 Study
in their student manual. Have
copies of TR 7.4A: Genesis
3:15 Study available. Read
the directions. Assign the
homework.
summarize how God
responded to Adam and
Eve's sin and showed grace
to them by promising
redemption. [7.7]
give examples of sin in the
lives of Adam and Eve's
descendants. [7.8]
1. Why did God ask Adam where he was? Where was Eve? How
did Adam and Eve respond to God? [7.7]
God asked Adam where he was because Adam and Eve were hiding.
However, God knew where they were and gave them an opportunity
to come to him, but they were ashamed and afraid because they had
sinned. When God asked Adam what happened, he blamed Eve for
giving him the fruit to eat and he blamed God for making Eve. Eve
said she was deceived by the serpent.
2. What is the protoevangelium and what does it say about God's
character? [7.7]
The protoevangelium is the first announcement of the gospel in the
Bible. It appears in Genesis 3:15 where God says to the serpent, "I
will put enmity between you and the woman, and between your
offspring and her offspring; he shall bruise your head, and you
shall bruise his heel." This promise looks forward to Jesus death
and resurrection. At the cross, Jesus was mortally wounded, but he
crushed the head of the serpent by rising from the dead. The Genesis
3:15 promise shows that God does not give up on or abandon us
after we sin. Instead, he pursues us with grace and love, sending
Jesus to bring us salvation.
3. How might physical death be seen as gracious? [7.7]
Physical death is not what God intended for us. It is part of the
curse that humans experience because of sin. When Adam and Eve
sinned, they were banned from the garden and refused access to
the Tree of Life. If they had been able to eat from this tree, they
would have lived forever in a world corrupted by sin and death.
By banishing them from the garden, humans lost the ability to live
forever. While this is a tragic consequence of the fall, it can also be
seen as gracious because living eternally in a world of sin and decay
would be unbearable. Thus, physical death puts a limit on human
suffering and the experience of evil.
4. How do you think Eve felt when Cain was born? Why? [7.8]
Answers will vary.
5. What were Cain's sins? [7.8]
God accepted his brother Abel's sacrifice and not Cain's. This made
Cain angry and jealous. God warned Cain not to give in to sin, but
Cain didn't listen to God and murdered Abel.
6. What is the way of Cain, and how does it contrast with those who walked
with God? Give examples of people who walked in each path. [7.8]
To walk in the way of Cain is to follow Cain's example by rebelling against God
and perpetuating evil. Lamech is a notable example: he murdered a young man and
boasted about it. The way of Cain contrasts with those who walked with God, like
Enoch. To walk with God is to acknowledge him as Creator and Lord, worship him,
and follow his commands.
7. What did God decide to do since most people followed the way of Cain? [7.8]
Because most people followed the way of Cain and only did evil, God decided to
send a flood upon the earth.
8. Why is faith necessary to please God? [7.8]
In the garden, Adam and Eve doubted God's goodness and went their own way.
Cain, it seems, had the same problem. But faith in God is necessary if we are to walk
with God. Hebrews 11:6 says, "And without faith it is impossible to please him, for
whoever would draw near to God must believe that he exists and that he rewards
those who seek him." Faith does not mean that we never have any questions or
doubts, but it does mean that we come to God with open hands, acknowledging our
need for him and believing that he will hear us. (Even asking God to help us believe
is an act of faith.)
GENESIS 3:15 STUDY
Students will analyze the
1. Have students use their Bible to complete
relationship between
TR 7.4A Genesis 3:15 Study.
Genesis 3:15 and other
2. Call on students to share their answers with the
verses of Scripture.
class.
TR 7.4A, Bible, and pen
20-25 minutes
CHAPTER 7 | 147
146 | CHAPTER 7


<!-- page-7 -->

CH
Lesson 5:
7.9-7.10
Read the objective to the class.
Go over the Discussion Questions
for Chapter 7.9-7.10. Have
students turn to Activity: Student
Covenant in their student
manual. Read the directions.
Display PS 7.5A Student
Covenant. Have students work in
groups of four or five.
OBJECTIVE
articulate what a covenant is,
how God made a covenant
with Noah, and what
happened to humans after the
tower of Babel. [7.9]
148 | CHAPTER7
1. What is a covenant? How does it differ from a contract? [7.9]
A covenant is an agreement between two parties that involves both
rights and responsibilities. Though it has some similarities to a
contract, a covenant is an other-centered agreement. Marriage is
an example of a covenant, where each party pledges what they will
do for the other, not what the other will do for them. A covenant
also expresses expectations of the covenant partner. A contract, in
contrast, is self-centered. It is mainly concerned with an individual's
rights and has legal ramifications for failure to keep the contract.
2. Describe God's covenant with Noah and the sign God gave for
that covenant. [7.9]
After the flood, God promised that he would never again destroy
the earth by flood. He placed a rainbow in the sky to remind
Noah of this promise. God expressed expectations of Noah and his
descendants-they were to follow God's ways and partner with him
in stewarding the earth.
3. What is significant about God's covenant with Noah? [7.9]
What is significant about this covenant is that God promised to be
faithful to the covenant, even if Noah and his descendants were not.
4. Why was God opposed to the tower of Babel? [7.9]
The people decided to make a name for themselves by building a
tower. The Babel project represented the height of human pride and
arrogance. God knew that humanity's plan could lead to great evil.
Note: The tower of Babel may have been a ziggurat, a sacred
structure with stairs ascending to a shrine. However, it was clearly
not for worshipping God, as the people wanted to use it to force
God to come down to them.
5. What did God do to prevent people from completing the
tower? What happened as a result of God's action? [7.9]
God confused the people's language. This led to people eventually
spreading out across the globe.
6. Why didn't God abandon people when they sinned? What does
this mean for us today? [7.10]
Despite all their wickedness, God did not abandon or give up on
people because of his character. The Bible reveals a God who is just.
He will not allow sin to continue forever unabated. But God is also
love—incredibly patient, gracious, and merciful toward sinners.
He knows our weaknesses. God does not strike us down or hate us
when we sin. Instead, he is ready to forgive, heal, and restore us.
Ultimately, God is working to remake us into the people he created
us to be.
STUDENT COVENANT
Students will draft a
1. Display PS 7.5A Student Covenant and have students
covenant to reinforce the
take turns reading the slides. When you show the final
concept that a covenant is
slide, inform students that they will work in groups to
an agreement between two
develop a one-page draft of a student covenant. Leave
parties that involves both
the last slide up so students can refer to it.
rights and responsibilities.
2. Divide the class into groups of four or five students.
Allow 10 minutes.
PS 7.5A, paper, and pen
25-30 minutes
3. When the time is up, have groups take turns sharing
items from their group's draft of a student covenant.
4. Have students vote on the items in order to develop
a final draft as a class. Write the items on the board
as the class decides which ones to use for the student
covenant.
CHAPTER 7 | 149


<!-- page-8 (book p.7) -->

CH
Lesson 6:
Activity p
Use the bag you prepared with
the words and phrases from TR
7.6A Act 2: The Fall Charades
to lead students through the
OBJECTIVE
reinforce concepts from the
lesson.
PREPARATION
• Materials needed: TR 7.6A
and a bag
• Time required: 45-50
minutes
150 | CHAPTER 7
THE FALL CHARADES
1. Have students work in three or four teams.
2. Inform students that they will play a game of charades
and compete against the other teams. Explain the
following rules:
a. All members of the team must play. In each turn,
one member of the team will perform the charade
without speaking aloud and the other team
members will try to guess the word or phrase. Team
members should take turns being the performer.
b. If the performer speaks, his or her team loses the
turn. The word or phrase the performer drew must
be put back in the bag.
c. The performer may pull on his or her ear to indicate
that the word or phrase sounds like another term.
d. The performer may provide the number of syllables
in the word or phrase by holding up the appropriate
number of fingers.
e. If a word or phrase is underlined on the paper, it is
a vocabulary term. The performer may indicate this
by putting his or her elbows together to form the
letter V.
f. A team wins a point by guessing a word or phrase
correctly.
3. Display the bag filled with the terms you cut out from
TR 7.6A Act 2: The Fall Charades. Explain that each
performer will draw a word or phrase for the charade
to act out for his or her team.
4. Begin the game and play through as many turns as
time allows. The team with the most points wins.
Videos P
In this lesson, students will view
four videos featuring Christian
educators and authors. Each expert
answers a specific worldview or
apologetics question. These videos
will allow students to expand their
knowledge and provide biblical
answers to thought-provoking
questions. The following videos
will be used in today's lesson:
1. What Is Sin and Why Does It
Matter? (Koukl, 4:35)
2. Is It a Sin to Have Doubt?
(Myers, 2:37)
3. What Is a Covenant? (Bywater,
2:34)
4. Is the Bible Restrictive?
(Shlemon, 4:01)
Play the videos one at a time in
the order listed above. Before each
video, direct students to read the
questions associated with that
video in their student manual
so they know what to listen for.
During and after the video has
been shown, students should write
their answers to the Discussion
Questions. It may be necessary to
play the video again so students
can answer all the questions.
Go over the questions for the
first video. Play the next video.
Continue in this manner until
the last video has been played and
questions have been discussed.
© Act 2: The Fall
Video 1:
What Is Sin, and Why Does It Matter?
1. How does the speaker explain the concept of sin?
Sin is something that everyone is familiar with, regardless of religious
convictions. Sin is when we've done something wrong, violated a
moral obligation, have not done something we should have done, or
have done a good thing in a bad way.
2. What does the speaker mean when he says that human beings
have "a moral machine" built into them? What does he say
supports this claim?
Every person has the capability to know right from wrong, and
we know the content of right and wrong to a large degree. The
expectations we have of praise or blame are both evidence that we
have a built-in moral machine.
3. What dimension does sin add to the concept of wrongdoing?
You are not just breaking a rule but offending a person. It implies
that you have an obligation to someone rather than just to an
abstract principle. This makes the concept of sin uniquely religious
because it entails the concept of a god or moral lawmaker.
4. What is guilt?
Guilt comes from the sense that we will be punished if we do what is
wrong.
5. Why are people willing to admit that there is right and wrong
but don't like to use the term sin?
People do not like to use the term sin because they do not want to
admit that the idea of right and wrong presupposes a lawmaker.
They want to be free to do whatever they want without thinking
they will offend God.
Video 2:
Is It a Sin to Have Doubt?
1. The speaker had a misconception about asking questions, sin,
and doubt. What was it?
For many years the speaker thought that if you ask questions, then
you're doubting. If you are doubting, you are sinning, so asking
questions is sin.
2. What realization helped the speaker to see he was mistaken?
He realized that the Bible is full of people who asked questions, such
as David asked in Psalm 10 or Job asked when trying to understand
the tragedies he experienced.
CHAPTER 7 | 151


<!-- page-9 (book p.7) -->

CH
Videos
(continued)
3. What three recommendations does the speaker give for dealing with
doubt?
First, doubt your doubts. Second, realize that you do not need to have 100
percent certainty about the things you believe. Third, realize that the Bible
invites our inquiries.
4. Who were the Bereans, and what did they teach us?
The Bereans were people mentioned in the book of Acts. They were encouraged
to compare what the apostle Paul was saying with what the Scriptures said.
5. How is the Bible unique compared to the thousands of religious books
the speaker read?
The Bible is the only one that encourages asking questions and affirms that we
want to seek truth in everything we do.
Video 3
What Is a Covenant?
1. What is another word for covenant?
The speaker says that covenants are often called treaties.
2. What are the five parts of ancient covenants or treaties?
The five parts are (1) the history of why there is a relationship between
two parties, where one party is often more powerful than the other; (2) the
obligations of the parties in the treaty (the things you have to do or have to
avoid; (3) promises or blessings for obedience; (4) threats of punishment for
disobedience; and (5) a means of succession for the next generation, so that
people who come after the treaty understand why they are in this relationship.
3. What example does the speaker give of a treaty or covenant in the Bible?
The speaker gives the example of the Ten Commandments (Exodus 20).
4. Does the covenant with Noah have the five parts that the speaker
describes are characteristic of a covenant or treaty? Explain.
Answers will vary but may include that the treaty has two parties, that God
promised not to flood the earth again, that he expected Noah and his family to
fill the earth, that God gave them animals and plants for food, and that the sign
of the rainbow was a way for future generations to be reminded of the covenant.
• Video 4:
Is the Bible Restrictive?
1. Why is it not a good idea to push back against the restrictions that God
places upon us?
The restrictions that God gives us are for our own good.
2. What illustration does the speaker give to discuss this?
The speaker explains that Lamborghinis are made for smooth roads, not jumps
or off-roading. If they are used wrongly, the cars can be damaged. In the same
way, God has made us to function a certain way and given us guidelines to
protect us from being hurt or damaged.
3. Many people object to God's restrictions, especially about sex. They want
to be free to disobey them. What does the speaker say they need to keep
in mind?
They need to keep the big picture in mind. The boundaries God gives us are
for our own protection; they are meant for our good. Going against his Word
can bring us negative consequences. Disobedience in the area of sex can expose
us to sexually transmitted disease, unwanted pregnancy, or emotional and
psychological turmoil as a result of broken relationships.
4. What is an ironic result of sin?
Through sin people can often find themselves in situations that are more
restrictive than they expected. God's restrictions are meant to bring us freedom
and flourishing because God knows how he created us and how we are supposed
to function.
152 | CHAPTER 7
CHAPTER 7 | 153


<!-- page-10 -->

CH
Lesson 8:
and
Review P
The Fall in Literature in their
student manual. Read the
directions. Divide the class into
five groups. Display PS 7.8A
Chapter 7 Review to help
students review the chapter.
roundations
THE FALL IN LITERATURE
Students will research famous works inspired by the
fall of Adam and Eve.
• Materials needed: computer, paper, and pen
• Time required: 20-30 minutes
1. Divide the class into five groups. Inform students
that the story of the fall has inspired many authors
through the ages.
2. Assign groups one of the following:
• Group 1: The Life of Adam and Eve (also called the
Apocalypse of Moses), apocryphal work
• Group 2: Le Jeu d'Adam (also called The Play of
Adam or The Mystery of Adam), author unknown,
medieval religious drama
• Group 3: Paradise Lost, by John Milton, epic poem
• Group 4: The Diaries of Adam and Eve, by Mark
Twain, short story later adapted into a play
• Group 5: Perelandra, by C. S. Lewis, science fiction
novel
3. State that groups will have 12 minutes to research
their assigned work using their computers. Students
should research the origin of the work (Groups 1 and
2), or the life of the author (Groups 3-5), as well as
the work's plot and purpose (all groups).
4. Have groups present the results of their research to
the class.
Lesson 9:
Study
Guide
Allow students to study for
Chapter 7 Test. Have them turn
to the Study Guide in their
student manual and complete the
exercises.
Key Terms
shalom
sin
transgression
iniquity
the fall
doctrine of original sin
covenall
Key Verses
Genesis 3:6
Genesis 3:14-19
Genesis 9:7-13
Romans 3:23
Romans 5:12
1. Describe God's creation and the four relationships at the
beginning of creation.
When God created the world, it was in perfect harmony filled with
shalom-peace, harmony, wholeness, completeness, welfare, and
tranquility. Adam and Eve, the first human beings, were in right
relationship with God and with themselves, without shame. They
were in right relationship with each other, living in harmony and
unity. They were in right relationship with creation, fulfilling their
role as stewards of God's creation.
2. Is the way the world was upon creation the way our world
is today? What do non-Christians think? What does the
Christian worldview say?
The world is full of evil, sin, and suffering. Most non-Christian
worldviews agree there is a problem in our world but disagree about its
causes and nature. The Christian worldview teaches that the problem
with the world is sin which causes evil and suffering on Earth.
3. What is the most common word used in the Bible for
wrongdoing, and what does it mean? What are two other words
used in the Bible for wrongdoing, and what do they mean?
The word most often used in Scripture for wrongdoing is sin, to
fall short or to miss the goal, to fail to love God and others. Two
other words used for wrongdoing are transgression and iniquity.
Transgression is the act of rebelling or breaking trust with another,
while iniquity refers to crooked, wicked, and perverse behavior.
4. Name and describe the second act in the Bible's metanarrative.
The Bible's metanarrative second act is the fall. Sin entered the world
when Adam and Eve chose to disobey God. A serpent, who the Bible
later identifies as Satan, asked Eve if God had really said that she
and Adam could not eat from any tree in the garden. But God had
not said this; he had said they could eat from any tree except for the
Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil. Satan lied to Eve and said they
would not die, and that God was trying to keep Adam and Eve from
being like God, knowing good and evil. Eve took the fruit and ate it.
She gave it to Adam, and he ate it, too. They both disobeyed God;
they rebelled against him.
5. How did the physical and spiritual consequences of the
fall affect people's relationship with God? How do those
consequences continue today?
When Adam and Eve sinned, they became vulnerable to death. They
died spiritually because their relationship with God was broken.
They would also die physically because they were expelled from the
garden of Eden and no longer able to eat from the Tree of Life. They
CHAPTER 7 | 155


<!-- page-11 -->

CH
Lesson 9:
Study
Guide
(continued)
156 | CHAPTER 7
no longer had a good relationship with God but instead, feared him and wanted
to hide from him. The consequences Adam and Eve experienced continue today
as people still die, and they still fear, mistrust, and rebel against God.
6. How did the fall affect nature and people's relationship with it?
The shalom of nature is gone; instead, death and decay impact every part of
creation. Because of the fall, God cursed the ground so that it would not easily
yield its crops. Instead of being stewards of God's creation, people abuse, exploit,
and destroy it for their own gain.
7. How did the fall affect how Adam and Eve and the rest of humanity see
themselves?
When Adam and Eve ate from the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, they
realized they were naked and became ashamed. They were no longer able to see
themselves as good, dependent on God, and made in his image. Instead, they
began to see themselves as broken, independent, and needing to justify or prove
their worth in many different ways. People today still see themselves in the
wrong way, thinking too much or too little of themselves, ignoring their need
for God, and basing their identity on their knowledge, possessions, or power.
8. How did the fall affect Adam and Eve's relationship and all human
relationships ever since?
When Adam and Eve sinned, they began to experience conflict, hurt, and a
loss of intimacy. Adam blamed Eve for his sin. God said that conflict would
be a part of their relationship; the unity and trust they had before the fall was
replaced with division and distrust. The negative impact of the fall on human
relationships continues today as people continue to mistreat one another.
9. Who or what do some secularists and atheists blame for evil in the world?
How might Christians respond to their accusations?
Some secularists and atheists say society or our culture is to blame for evil in the
world. They think people do not have a bend toward evil. Some blame religion
itself, especially the Christian faith, because it teaches that people are sinful.
But Christians know evil is the result of rebellion against God. A response to
secularists and atheists is to affirm the Bible teaches that God is good, not the
author or creator of evil. He does not tempt anyone to think or do evil things.
10. What is the doctrine of original sin, and why should we care about it today?
The doctrine of original sin is the belief that Adam and Eve's first sin corrupted
the nature of their descendants. The doctrine of original sin matters to us since it
explains why everyone sins, keeps on sinning, and can't stop on their own.
11. In what three ways did God show grace to Adam and Eve after they ate
the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil!
God first showed grace to Adam and Eve when they were hiding in shame. God
called out to them asking, "Where are you?" Though God knew where they
were, he wanted to give them a chance to confess their sin and repent. The second way
God showed grace was when God promised that the offspring of the woman would bruise
the serpent's head, though the serpent would bruise the offspring's heel. Many theologians
think this is the first announcement of God's plan to send his Son, Jesus, to die on the
cross for our sins. The promise is called the protoevangelium. A third way that God showed
grace to Adam and Eve was by sending them out of the garden of Eden so they would not
live forever. God did this to limit the suffering that human beings experience.
12. Explain who Cain, Abel, and Seth were; what they did; and how God interacted
with them.
Cain, Abel, and Seth were Adam and Eve's sons. Cain and Abel brought sacrifices before
God. Cain brought a harvest offering, while Abel offered up a lamb. God was pleased with
Abel's sacrifice but rejected Cain's, perhaps because of Cain's attitude. God told Cain to
guard against sin, but Cain didn't listen and instead killed Abel. God punished Cain by
banishing him and placing a mark on him so no one would kill him.
13. Who were Enoch and Lamech? What two paths did humans begin to follow? What
did God decide to do when people filled the world with sin?
Some people worshipped and followed God. Enoch was one of them; he was taken up into
heaven without dying. Others followed the way of Cain as they sinned and became more
corrupt. Lamech was a wicked man who murdered another. God decided to destroy every
living creature through a flood. The only ones who escaped destruction were Noah, his
family, and the animals and birds on the ark.
14. According to the Bible, what does a rainbow signify? Include and define the term
covenant in your answer.
God placed a rainbow in the sky as a sign of his covenant with Noah, Noah's family, and all
living things. A covenant is an agreement between two parties that involves both rights and
responsibilities. God promised he would never again destroy all life on earth with a flood.
15. Did the flood stop people from sinning? What happened with the tower of Babel?
Explain.
The flood did not stop people from sinning, including Noah's family. Ham, one of Noah's
sons, shamed his father when Noah was drunk and naked in his tent. People kept sinning
after the flood with rebellious attitudes. They decided to build the tower of Babel to reach
up to heaven. God was not pleased with their actions and confused the people's language,
which caused people to spread out on the earth.
16. Why should we have hope despite the fall, knowing that sin and death are all
around us?
We should have hope because God loves us and hates that sin and death are in his creation.
God had a plan to save people and the universe; he promised that someone would bruise
the head of the serpent. Even though people became so evil that God decided to flood the
earth, he saved Noah and his family. God promised not to flood the earth again. The rest of
the Bible shows that God continued working to redeem people, and he continues to do so.
17. Read and study the five Key Verses listed at the top of the study guide.
5 Act 2: The Fall
CHAPTER 7 | 157


<!-- page-12 (book p.7) -->

CH
Lesson 10:
Chapter 7
Test P
Distribute TR 7.10A Chapter 7 Test to each student and allow
time for them to complete the exercises. Students who finish
early may start reading Chapter 8. Assign homework.
Notes
Act 3: Redemption
Initiated-Israel
158 | CHAPTER 7
