# Chapter 10

<!-- page-1 (book p.10) -->

CH
Chapter 9
Test P
Distribute TR 9.10A Chapter 9 Test to each student and allow
time for them to complete the exercises. Students who finish
early may start reading Chapter 10. Assign homework.
Notes
200 | CHAPTER 9
Accomplished-Jesus


<!-- page-2 -->

Accomplished-Jesus
Chapter 10 Syllabus
Lesson
REVIEW
WATCH
REVIEW FOR
STUDY FOR
GIVE
Assignment
Chapter 9 Test
Questions for Chapter 10.1-10.2
Activity: Symbolic Numbers
Chapter 10.3-10.4
Questions for Chapter 10.3-10.4
Questions for Chapter 10.3-10.4
Activity: Pen a Parable
Chapter 10.5-10.6
Questions for Chapter 10.5-10.6
Questions for Chapter 10.5-10.6
Activity: Identifying Jesus
Chapter 10.7-10.8
Questions for Chapter 10.7-10.8
Questions for Chapter 10.7-10.8
Activity: Teach Others Also
Chapter 10.9-10.10
Questions for Chapter 10.9-10.10
Questions for Chapter 10.9-10.10
Activity: The Incarnation Bible Study
Activity: First-Century Sleuth
Videos
Video Questions
Video Questions
Activity: Mythical or Factual?
Complete Study Guide
Chapter 11.1-11.2
Questions for Chapter 11.1-11.2
*Student Textbook (ST) Student Manual (SM)
A full-year syllabus is available in the online resources.
202 | CHAPTER 10
Page
204-205
ST 138-140
SM 186
206-207
ST 140-143
SM 188
ST 143-145
SM 190
210-211
ST 146-148
SM 192
SM 194-196
215-217
SM 199-201
219-221
ST 149-152
SM 204-205
FOUNDATIONS C
Chapter 10
OVERVIEW
God became a human in the Incarnation
of Jesus. The Incarnation is essential for
salvation, affirms that creation is good,
and shows that Jesus suffers with us. Jesus
began his ministry by being baptized and
announcing the kingdom of God. He
preached the gospel of the forgiveness
of sin and the rescue of creation. Jesus
claimed to be the Messiah and thus God
himself. As Messiah, he fulfilled the roles
of prophet, priest, and king.
Through parables, Jesus described
the kingdom of God as his ultimate rule
with justice and peace prevailing over
all creation. God's kingdom arrived on
earth through Jesus, but he also taught
that the full revelation of the kingdom
is postponed to allow many to enter it
during the present age. Miracles served as
a sign of the kingdom and confirmation
of Jesus' identity. They also demonstrated
God's power and love for people. Jesus'
most famous ethical teaching was the
Sermon on the Mount, which included
eight beatitudes as well as teachings that
show us God is concerned with the heart
as well as our actions.
Jesus was crucified, dying on the
cross as our substitute and paying the
penalty for our sins. He also defeated
sin and death through his crucifixion
and resurrection. Some skeptics doubt
that Jesus rose from the dead, but
the resurrection is the most plausible
explanation for the evidence and for the
disciples transformation. Jesus ascended
to heaven where he reigns as king and is
available to all who call on his name.
PREPARATION
Lesson 3:
Make a copy of TR 10.3A Who Do You
Say I Am? for each student. Make a
copy of the Answer Key for yourself.
Lesson 5:
Make a copy of TR 10.5A The
Incarnation Bible Study for each
student. Make one copy of the Answer
Key for yourself.
Lesson 6:
Review PS 10.6A First-Century Sleuth
to become familiar with the activity.
Make one copy of TR 10.6A-B First-
Century Sleuth and First-Century
Sleuth Answer Key. Place each of the
clue sheets and code sheets at different
stations around the classroom.
Lesson:
Access and preview the five videos
listed on Lesson 7. See the inside back
cover of this manual for instructions to
stream videos.
Lesson 8:
Review PS 10.8A Mythical or Factual?
to become familiar with the activity.
Print a copy of TR 10.10A Chapter 10
Test for each student.
LESSON MATERIALS
Presentation Slides
PS 10.6A First-Century Sleuth
PS 10.8A Mythical or Factual?
PS 10.8B Chapter 10 Review
Teacher Resources
TR 10.3A Who Do You Say I Am?
TR 10.5A The Incarnation Bible Study
TR 10.6A First-Century Sleuth
TR 10.6B First-Century Sleuth Answer Key
TR 10.10A Chapter 10 Test
CHAPTER 10 | 203


<!-- page-3 (book p.10) -->

CH
Lesson 1:
10.1-10.2
Review Chapter 9 Test. Have
students turn to page 135 in
their student textbook. Read the
objectives to the class. Go over
the answers to the Discussion
Questions for Chapter 10.1-
10.2 on page 184 in the student
manual. Have students turn to
Activity: Symbolic Numbers in
their student manual. Read the
directions. Divide the class into
groups. Assign the homework.
conclude three ways the
Incarnation is significant.
[10.1]
• Students will be able to relate
Jesus' ministry to the gospel
and the kingdom of God.
[10.2]
FOUNDATIONS 9
204 | CHAPTER 10
1. What is the Incarnation, and what makes it significant? [10.1]
The Incarnation is the action of the eternally divine Son of God
becoming a human being. The Son of God became human so
that he might redeem us from sin and death. The Incarnation is
significant in three ways: First, it is necessary for our salvation. Jesus
had to become human so that he could save humans. Second, it
affirms that creation is good. Since Jesus became human, matter can
never be considered inherently bad. Third, it means that Jesus suffers
with us. Jesus experienced what we experience as humans. He can
empathize with our struggles.
2. Why is the Incarnation necessary for salvation? [10.1]
If God is good, then he must bring justice on evil. We have all
sinned and corrupted God's world. We are under bondage to sin and
incapable of freeing ourselves. Our sins also have real consequences
and have caused violence and disaster in God's world. Because
God is good and loves all he made, he cannot be indifferent to the
wrongs we do. The Incarnation is necessary for salvation because we
need an innocent, fully human yet fully divine representative who
can stand in our place before God and break the power of sin. By
becoming human, Jesus demonstrated his love and did what broken
humans could not. He lived a sinless, truly human life; took on
the punishment we deserve; answered to God for human sin; and
crushed the power of sin so we can live in relationship with God.
3. "When Jesus became human, this confirmed that our problem
is not that we are human, but that we are not human enough."
Based on what you know of the biblical story so far, what do
you think this statement means? [10.1]
Possible answer: God created the world and humans, affirming that
everything he had made was good. However, humans fell into sin
and became corrupt. Scripture clearly states that all humans have
fallen under the curse of sin (Psalm 14:1-3, Romans 3:23). This has
led some people to falsely assume that being human is bad in and
of itself. Some, like the gnostics, concluded that the body itself was
bad. Jesus proves this assumption wrong. He was fully human, yet
he lived a perfectly sinless life. By taking on human flesh, resisting
sin, and living a life that was fully pleasing to the Father, Jesus made
it clear that being human isn't the problem; the problem is sin. Only
Jesus can break the power of sin. By repenting and putting our trust
in Jesus, we become more truly human as we are transformed to be
like Christ.
4. What is the kingdom of God? Why would Jewish people in the first century
be excited by the message, "The kingdom of God is at hand"? [10.2]
The kingdom of God is not heaven; it is the just and peaceful rule of God over
all creation. The Jewish people had long been living in exile and under oppressive
empires. They were waiting for the day when God would return to restore Israel.
When this happened, it would mean that the exile would finally be over, sin would
be dealt with, and God would establish his reign over all of creation.
SYMBOLIC NUMBERS
Students will articulate
1. Divide the class into six groups and assign each group
how symbolic numbers
a passage.
in the Bible reinforce its
• Group 1-Matthew 2:7-12 • Group 4-Matthew 9:18-26
message.
• Group 2-Matthew 4:1-11
• Group 5-Matthew 10:1-8
• Group 3-Matthew 5:2-11
• Group 6-Matthew 12:38-42
• Materials needed: Bible,
pen, and paper
2. Instruct groups to read the passage assigned to them
and look for symbolic numbers represented in the
passage. Each group should use the information
about biblical numbers below and discuss how
the numbers reinforce the story or message in the
passage.
• The number one symbolizes the unity of God and
the singular sacrifice of Christ.
• The number three symbolizes the triune nature of
God and completeness.
• The number four symbolizes the creative work of
God and universal truth.
• The number seven symbolizes completion,
perfection, and rest.
• The number eight symbolizes new life,
resurrection, a new covenant, and new
beginnings.
• The number twelve symbolizes God's government.
• The number forty symbolizes testing and trial.!
3. Have each group appoint a representative to briefly
report the group's findings to the class.
Brian G. Chilton, "Reference Guide to Biblical Numerology," Cross Examined,
https://crossexamined.org/reference-guide-biblical-numerology/.
CHAPTER 10 | 205


<!-- page-4 (book p.10) -->

CH
Lesson 2:
10.3-10.4
Read the objectives to the class.
Go over the answers to the
Discussion Questions for Chapter
10.3-10.4. Have students turn
to Activity: Pen a Parable in
their student manual and find a
partner. Assign the homework.
contrast popular views of
Jesus' identity with Jesus'
own claim to be the Messiah.
[10.3]
explain four lessons Jesus
taught about the kingdom of
God through parables and to
interpret the parable of the
tenants. [10.4]
206 | CHAPTER 10
1. What are common ideas about Jesus' identity? How did he
identify himself? [10.3]
Common ideas about Jesus' identity include: prophet, healer, wise
teacher, philosopher, good example, moral leader, or social reformer.
While these may be true to some degree, Jesus identified himself
as the Messiah and as God incarnate. Because Jesus made clear
claims to be God, he cannot be treated as merely or primarily a wise
teacher, moral leader, or social reformer.
Note: C. S. Lewis noted in his book Mere Christianity that Jesus can
be either dismissed as a liar or lunatic for his claims to deity or taken
seriously as God incarnate. If he lied or was insane, he could not be
a great moral teacher. We cannot conclude that he is simply a great
human who fulfilled a significant human role in history: Jesus did
not leave that possibility open to us.
2. As the Messiah, what three roles did Jesus identify with? How
did Jesus live out these roles? [10.3]
Jesus identified as a prophet, priest, and king. As a prophet, Jesus
announced God's covenant promises and called people to repent.
As a priest, Jesus offered himself as a sacrifice for our sins. Now he
stands before God on our behalf. As a king, Jesus claimed to be the
true ruler of the world. He demonstrated his victory over sin and
death by his own death and resurrection.
3. Why did Jesus teach in parables, knowing that parables would
hide the truth from some people? [10.4]
In Matthew 13:10-17, Jesus explains part of the reason he began
to speak almost exclusively in parables and to explain them only to
his disciples. Jesus quotes the prophecies of Isaiah, saying that some
people would be spiritually blind to his teachings. Jesus explained
his parables to those who were open and interested in learning more,
but he did not offer an explanation for the parables to those who
refused to believe.
Note: Parables were a common form of teaching in Jewish culture.
These stories helped people understand spiritual concepts by
connecting them to things they understood in everyday life. Jesus
may also have used parables for the same reason that he sometimes
warned the disciples not to tell anyone that he was the Messiah. In
order to fulfill his ministry, Jesus waited for the right time to openly
reveal himself.
4. What four things do Jesus' parables in Mark 4 and Matthew 13 teach about the
kingdom of God? How was the nature of Jesus' kingdom different from the one
his hearers were expecting? [10.4]
Jesus' taught the following about the kingdom:
• the kingdom was arriving through him, but it is not yet fully realized,
• the kingdom does not come with irresistible power in the present age,
• the final judgment in God's kingdom is reserved for a future time, and
• the full revelation of the kingdom of God is postponed to allow many to enter it
during the present age.
The Jewish people were looking for a kingdom that would come at once, with military
power. They hoped that the Messiah would crush their enemies and restore Israel to a
place of leadership among the nations. Jesus' kingdom came through humility, service,
love, forgiveness, and sacrifice rather than overwhelming might.
PEN A PARABLE
Students will write a
parable to explain a biblical
truth.
• Materials needed:
Bible, paper, and pen
1. Have students work in pairs. Explain that a parable is a
story in which characters acting in everyday situations
represent a biblical truth. Direct them to read
Galatians 1:6-10 and to write a parable demonstrating
the foolishness of exchanging the gospel of Christ for a
false gospel.
2. If time allows, have students share their parables with
the class.
CHAPTER 10 | 207


<!-- page-5 (book p.10) -->

CH
Lesson 3:
10.5-10.6
, P
Read the objectives to the
class. Go over the answers
to the Discussion Questions
for Chapter 10.5-10.6. Have
students turn to Activity:
Identifying Jesus in their
student manual. Distribute one
copy of TR 10.3A Who Do You
Say I Am? to each student. Have
them read and complete the
exercises. Assign the homework.
discuss two miracles Jesus
accomplished and what they
were a sign of. [10.5]
• Students will be able to name
Jesus' most famous ethical
teaching. [10.6]
O Students will be able to
list and describe the eight
categories of people that Jesus
referred to as blessed in the
beatitudes. [10.6]
208 | CHAPTER 10
1. What was the purpose of Jesus' miracles? [10.5]
Jesus showed his love for the world by healing and restoring people.
He demonstrated his power over disease and death by curing sickness
and raising people to life. These miracles were signs that God's
kingdom had arrived—all that was broken would be set right.
2. Why do you think Jesus wept for Lazarus even though he knew
he was going to raise him from the dead? [10.5]
Possible answer: Jesus' sorrow at the tomb of Lazarus reveals a
remarkable truth about God. God does not stand aloof from human
suffering. He understands our pain and enters into it. He knows what
it is like to lose a friend, and he does not gloss over griet. In weeping,
Jesus reveals the heart of God, who is grieved over the sin and death
that has corrupted his world. At the tomb, Jesus shows us that God is
not just powerful, but that he is loving and empathetic.
3. How did Jesus intensify the Old Testament commands? [10.6]
Jesus warned people against thinking that following the letter of the
law is enough. God cares about the attitude of our hearts as well as
our outward actions. For example, in the Ten Commandments, God
commanded the Israelites, "You shall not murder" (Exodus 20:13).
However, Jesus says that "everyone who is angry with his brother" or
"insults his brother" is in danger of judgment (Matthew 5:21-22).
To hate your neighbor in your heart, to insult or otherwise abuse
them, is thus a kind of murder. In Jesus' teaching, we are to love God
with all of our heart, and as we are fully loved, we love our neighbor,
treating others as we would like to be treated.
4. What did Jesus mean when he said, "Judge not, that you be not
judged" (Matthew 7:1): [10.6]
In saying this, Jesus did not mean that people are free to do whatever
they like without judgment. He does not mean that we can never say
that something is wrong or make any judgments at all. In fact, all
of us must make judgments every day. For example, we must judge
whether a particular meal will be good for us or if a person is worthy
of our trust. Jesus' command not to judge is about judging with
grace, since "with the judgment you pronounce you will be judged,
and with the measure you use it will be measured to you" (Matthew
7:2). Jesus wants us to pay close attention to our own sin and to clear
out the log in our own eye instead of being critical and judgmental
about the speck in another person's eye. When we do call out sin in
another person, we must do so with grace and love, remembering our
own weakness.
IDENTIFYING JESUS
Students will use biblical and
• Materials needed: TR 10.3A
non-biblical evidence to rebut
and pen
false claims about Jesus' identity.
• Time required: 25-30 minutes
1. Distribute one copy of TR 10.3A Who Do You Say I Am? to each student. Read the directions and
have them write the numbers of the false belief next to the counter evidence that refutes the false
belief. There may be more than one answer.
2. Go over the answers with students before continuing with the activity.
3. Remind students that the questions "Who is Jesus?" and "Did Jesus really rise from the dead?"
are two of the most important questions that need to be answered. If Jesus is who he says he is
and truly rose from the grave, this changes everything.
4. Explain that students will role-play conversations about the identity of Jesus. You will play
the part of the skeptic or member of another religion represented on TR 10.3A. Have student
volunteers play the part of the Christian.
5. Inform students that they may reference the counterevidence on TR 10.3A and their Bible to help
them navigate the conversation. The Christian should begin the conversation by asking you, the
non-Christian, "Who do you think Jesus is?" Respond to the student with one of the positions
on TR 10.3A. Then, the Christian should ask clarifying questions and respectfully explain why he
or she believes the evidence supports a different conclusion about Jesus. Examples of clarifying
questions such as, "What do you mean by -
?" and "How did you come to believe that is true?"
will be helpful in navigating spiritual conversations with non-Christians.
6. Continue in this manner using different false beliefs and having student volunteers
respond with the appropriate counterevidence.
NOTES ON SPIRITUAL TRADITIONS:
(1) New spirituality teachings
heavily influenced by new
often claim that God is in and
spirituality.
around all of us and that we all
become more divine by reaching
(2) When conversing with
higher degrees of enlightenment,
Jehovah's Witnesses, reading
spiritual knowledge, and
Psalm 102:25-27 with them
personal liberation. This
followed by Hebrews 1:6-12 is
typically results in a justification
often preferable to referencing
of whatever behavior feels right
other Scriptures, since these two
to the individual. "Christ" is seen
passages have not been altered
in the Jehovah's Witness' special
as a spiritual status reached by
Jesus, Buddha, Muhammad, and
translation of the Bible, the New
other significant religious figures
World Translation (NWT). Many
rather than a title ascribed
other passages giving clear
to Jesus as God and Messiah.
reference to Jesus' deity in the
(3) The Quran recognizes that
Jesus was a great healer and
prophet, though Muhammad
denied the deity of Christ. The
Quran also instructs Muslims
to read the Old and New
Testaments, though modern
Muslims often avoid this by
arguing that the Bible has been
corrupted since the time of
Muhammad (either through
copying errors or because it
cannot be translated from the
original languages without
altering the meaning).
NWT have been altered to allow
Some progressive Christianity is
denials of Jesus' divinity.!
Tim Barnett, "An Argument for Jehovah's Witnesses: Jesus Is Jehovah", Stand to
Reason, https://www.str.org/w/an-argument-for-jehovah-s-witnesses-jesus-is-jehovah?
CHAPTER 10 | 209


<!-- page-6 (book p.10) -->

CH
Lesson 4:
10.7-10.8
Read the objectives to the
class. Go over the answers
to the Discussion Questions
for Chapter 10.7-10.8. Have
students turn to Activity: Teach
Others Also in their student
manual and complete the
activity. Assign the homework.
© Students will be able to
explain two aspects of Jesus'
redemptive work on the
cross. [10.7]
• Students will be able
to respond to skeptical
objections to the
resurrection. [10.8]
give the most plausible
explanation for the disciples
transformation. [10.8]
210 CHAPTER 10
1. What is ironic about the Roman sign placed above Jesus' head,
"This is Jesus, the King of the Jews"? [10.7]
The sign was intended as a mockery of Jesus. The Romans were
saying, in effect, "Look! There is your king! Yes, that's the one-
broken, bloodied, and naked on the cross." The sign was a warning
to all those who dared to call themselves king. The sign was ironic
because it proclaimed the truth about who Jesus really was. He was
the true king of Israel. On the cross, Jesus seemed to be defeated, but
in reality, this was the moment of his victory.
2. What did Jesus accomplish on the cross? [10.7]
On the cross, Jesus died as our substitute, the sacrifice for our sins.
He suffered in our place, defeating and ultimately breaking the
power of sin. On the cross, Jesus secured our redemption. Through
Jesus' sacrificial death, we have been rescued from the consequences
of sin, restored to a right relationship with God, and freed to live in
alignment with God's purpose for us. Jesus defeated the enemies that
hold us in bondage: sin and death.
3. What are the alternative explanations of the resurrection? Are
these alternatives plausible? Explain. [10.8]
One of the most popular theories about the resurrection is that
the disciples stole Jesus body and then falsely proclaimed that
Jesus had risen from the dead. There are several problems with this
explanation. First, the Pharisees asked Pilate to put soldiers around
the tomb so that no one could steal the body (Matthew 27:62-66).
Later, the Pharisees claimed that the disciples had done just that
(Matthew 28:11-14). In order for this to have happened, the
disciples would have had to overpower as many as sixteen Roman
guards, roll away the stone covering the tomb, and make off with the
body before anyone else noticed. In essence, this theory requires us
to believe that the disciples (who deserted Jesus on the night of his
betrayal and were completely dejected by the death of their leader)
somehow became a fearless fighting unit almost overnight, stole
Jesus' body, hid it somewhere else, propagated the lie that Jesus had
risen, and willingly suffered persecution for what they knew was a lie.
Another common theory is that Jesus didn't actually die on the
cross, but rather fainted from torture and was merely presumed
dead. Medical and historical evidence make this very hard to believe.
Crucifixion was a brutal method of execution, and the Romans had
perfected it. Even if Jesus were not actually dead, he would have been
extremely weak. He would have had to roll away the stone covering
his tomb all by himself. But a weak and wounded Jesus was hardly
likely to convince anyone that he is Lord and worthy of worship.
Finally, the resurrection is sometimes explained as a hallucination.
However, it is extremely uncommon for more than one person to
have the same hallucination. In order to believe this theory, we must believe that over
500 people had a similar hallucination at the same time.
4. The apostle Paul said that if Jesus didn't rise from the dead, our faith is
worthless (1 Corinthians 15:17). Why is this the case? [10.8]
If Jesus didn't rise from the dead, then death had the final word after all and God's
promises failed. Jesus' mission would also have failed, as staying dead would have
shown that he could not beat death. If Jesus did not rise, then we are still stuck in
bondage to sin and death from which there is no escape. However, if Jesus did rise from
the dead, it means that sin and death have been defeated and that new life is available
to all. It means that we need to listen to what Jesus has to say and follow his way.
TEACH OTHERS ALSO
Students will create a
1. Have students create an illustration, acronym, or
teaching aid to explain
acrostic they can use to explain the gospel message
the gospel.
to someone who has never heard it before. Elements
should include: what's wrong with the world, how
Jesus overcame it, why we need Jesus, how we can be
• Materials needed: paper
and pen
in right relationship with God, and why it's important.
The teaching aid should use simple language and
avoid Christian jargon.
2. If time allows, have some students share their
teaching aids with the class or allow students to role-
play using their teaching aides to share the gospel.
CHAPTER 10 | 211


<!-- page-7 (book p.10) -->

CH
Lesson 5:
Chapter P
10.9-10.10
Read the objective to the class. Go
over the answers to the Discussion
Questions for Chapter 10.9-
10.10. Have students turn to
Activity: The Incarnation Bible
Study in their student manual.
Distribute one copy of TR 10.5A
The Incarnation Bible Study to
each student. Have them read and
complete the exercises.
OBJECTIVE
• Students will be able to analyze
two major implications of
Jesus' ascension. [10.9]
s The Incarmation Bible Study
212 | CHAPTER 10
1. What was Jesus' last command to his followers before his
ascension, and why is it significant today? [10.9]
Jesus commanded his followers to wait for the coming of the Holy
Spirit, after which they were to preach the gospel, to be witnesses "in
Jerusalem and in all Judea and Samaria, and to the end of the earth"
(Acts 1:8). Jesus commissioned his followers to continue spreading
the message of the kingdom of God, inviting others to know and
follow Jesus as well. We still carry on that mission today!
2. Name two major implications of the ascension of Jesus. [10.9]
In ascending to heaven, Jesus claimed all power and authority. He
sits at God's right hand and rules over the whole world. This is good
news for everyone. However, not everyone has acknowledged that
Jesus is Lord. That is why Jesus instructs us to share this good news
with the whole world. Since Jesus is Lord, Christians are called to
give their allegiance to him, pick up their crosses, and follow him.
The ascension also means that Jesus is available and accessible,
always present with his followers. We do not have to go to a temple
to experience God's presence. Furthermore, Jesus understands our
weaknesses, and he now advocates for us before the Father. Because
of this, we can approach God with confidence, knowing that we
have been forgiven.
3. What does it mean to have faith in Jesus? [10.10]
Having faith in Jesus is giving him our ultimate allegiance and trust.
It means we stop trusting in ourselves; we stop believing we can
make it on our own. Instead, we confess and turn away from our
sins. We acknowledge the ways that we fail to love God and others.
We repent and turn to Jesus. Faith in Jesus means trusting that
through his life, death, resurrection, and ascension, we have been
forgiven and invited into new life. Our faith in Jesus also moves us
to action as we commit to following the way of Jesus.
THE INCARNATION BIBLE STUDY
Students will investigate
1. Distribute one copy of TR 10.5A The Incarnation Bible
God's Word on the
Study to each student. Direct students to complete
correlation between the
the exercises to analyze what the Bible has to say
Incarnation of Jesus and
about the goodness of the human body. They should
the goodness of the body.
be able to relate the Incarnation and other teachings
of the New Testament to modern cultural issues
regarding the human body.
2. If time allows, have the class discuss their answers.
• Materials needed:
TR 10.5A, Bible, and pen
25-30 minutes
FOUNDATIONS G
CHAPTER 10 | 213


<!-- page-8 (book p.10) -->

CH
Lesson 6:
Activity P
Use PS 10.6A First-Century
Sleuth to lead students through
the activity. Place each activity
sheet from TR 10.6A First-
Century Sleuth in different
stations around the classroom.
Keep a copy of TR 10.6B
First-Century Sleuth Answer
Key for yourself.
OBJECTIVE
O Students will examine the
evidence for the death and
resurrection of Jesus and
identify a first-century
Christian creed.
PREPARATION
• Materials needed: PS 10.6A,
TR 10.6A-B, pen, and paper
O Time required:
45-50 minutes
TRIDEA Finst-Century Sleath
First-Century Sleuth
214 | CHAPTER 10
FIRST-CENTURY SLEUTH
1. Divide the class into four or five teams and give each
team paper and pens. Each clue sheet and each code
sheet from TR 10.6A First-Century Sleuth should be
placed at different stations around the room.
2. Display PS 10.6A First-Century Sleuth and read slides
1-2 to introduce the activity's storyline. Inform
students that each team must work to complete all the
stations within 35 minutes.
3. When the 35 minutes are up, display slide 3 and have
the students give the answers for each blank on the
scroll to the left. Use TR 10.6B First-Century Sleuth
Answer Key to go over the answers with students.
4. Read the possible explanations on slide 3, then display
slide 4. Have each team give their conclusion to the
question on the slide.
5. Read slides 5-6. Ask students if they succeeded in
decoding the italicized except from 1 Corinthians
15:3-4 displayed on the slide. Have the class recite 1
Corinthians 15:3-4 together.
Note: Some prominent skeptics have admitted that
though they cannot provide a viable alternative theory,
they will not accept that the resurrection is possible.
This bias against the supernatural prevents many from
believing the resurrection is a legitimate option for what
really happened, despite the resurrection being the best
fit for the evidence.!
'Jimmy Wallace, "Can the Resurrection Be Defended Historically?", Cold-Case
Christianity, https://coldcasechristianity.com/writings/can-the-resurrection-be-
defended-historically/.
Lesson 7:
Videos P
In this lesson, students will view
five interviews of various Christian
educators and authors. Each expert
answers a specific worldview or
apologetics question. These videos
will allow students to expand their
knowledge and provide biblical
answers to thought-provoking
questions. The following videos
will be used in today's lesson:
1. Was Jesus Just a Magician?
(Wallace, 3:02)
2. Did Jesus Claim to Be God?
(Wallace, 3:36)
3. Can Miracles Happen? (Turek,
2:13)
4. What Is God's Kingdom?
(Bywater, 4:56)
5. Should Christians Judge Others?
(Wallace, 3:02) (optional)
Play the videos one at a time in
the order listed above. Before each
video, direct students to read the
questions associated with that
video in their student manual
so they know what to listen for.
During and after the video has
been shown, students should write
their answers to the Discussion
Questions. It may be necessary to
play the video again so students
can answer all the questions.
Go over the questions for the
first video. Play the next video.
Continue in this manner until
the last video has been played and
questions have been discussed.
Video 1:
Was Jesus Just a Magician?
1. What is a magician?
A magician is someone who can fool an audience with some sort of
sleight of hand or magic tricks.
2. How is the feeding of the 5,000 from a few loaves and fish
different from magic tricks?
This miracle is different from a magic trick because it is substantive.
People ate the food and interacted with the evidence of the miracle.
3. What is the evidence for Jesus' death and resurrection?
Evidence for Jesus' death include the blood and water coming from
his side came from, a medical condition that occurs after a person's
heart stops beating. Evidence also includes eyewitness testimony
from people who had nothing to gain from their claims.
4. What are three reasons people tell lies? Does this fit the
disciples' situation?
People tell lies for money, power, or stature. No, the disciples had
nothing to gain by lying about the resurrection, and they were
willing to die for their beliefs.
5. What act demonstrates that Jesus was not a magician and was
more than a man?
If the resurrection is true, that is beyond magic. Only God can raise
himself from the dead.
Video 2:
Did Jesus Claim to Be God?
1. How is Jesus different from other religious leaders or sages like
Bahaullah?
Unlike other religious figures, Jesus did not claim to be merely a
prophet or sage. Jesus claimed to be God.
2. How would you respond to someone who says Jesus never
made explicit claims to be God?
Jesus made many statements that would have been explicit claims
to deity to first-century Jews. Answers should include one of these
examples: the I AM statements that Jesus used in the gospel of John
claim the name, power, status, and title of God; Jesus claimed to
have preexisted Abraham; the Jews sought to kill him for blasphemy
because he was identifying himself as God.
CHAPTER 10 | 215
g Act 4: Redemption Accomplished-Jesus


<!-- page-9 (book p.10) -->

CH
Lesson 7:
Videos
(continued)
3. How does Jesus' choice of words in the Gospels differentiate him from the
prophets?
The prophets used phrases such as, The Lord your God says ..." Jesus took the
position of God when he said, "Verily, verily, I say unto you...
Video 3
Can Miracles Happen?
1. What is a miracle?
A miracle is God intervening in the natural order to overpower natural laws.
2. Can the Being who created natural laws overpower natural laws?
Of course. If even finite humans can overpower natural laws like gravity,
certainly the Creator of natural laws can overpower them.
3. What is the greatest miracle in the Bible?
The greatest miracle in the Bible is the first verse. If that verse is true, everything
else in the Bible is possible.
Video 4
What Is God's Kingdom?
1. What was the problem with Israel asking for a king?
The problem wasn't that Israel wanted a king, but that they wanted a king like
other nations had.
2. How is the new covenant different from the old covenant?
The old covenant was a national system. The new covenant includes the entire
world.
3. How should Christians view their citizenship?
Christians are citizens of the kingdom of God and also citizens of different
nations on earth.
4. How should Christians see the role of local churches and local Christians?
Christians should see their churches as embassies of the kingdom of God.
Christians should be ambassadors of Christ in their communities.
5. What does it mean to live as a citizen of the kingdom of God?
Jesus has our primary allegiance and our first loyalty.
/ Video 5
Should Christians Judge Others?
1. What is the biggest lie or cliché about Christianity?
The biggest lie is that Christians can't or shouldn't judge.
2. How is the belief that you shouldn't judge self-refuting?
If you say it's bad to judge, you are making a judgment.
3. What is the biblical view of judging?
Answers should include one or more of the following: Jesus judged bad ideas
and actions often. Christians are told to hate evil but not people who hold evil
ideas. We must judge or identify that something is wrong or inaccurate before
we can share biblical truth.
4. How do we judge something properly?
Judging should include speaking truth with love in the context of relationship.
Note: If we don't love people, we won't earn their trust and will not be able to
influence their thinking.
CHAPTER 10 | 217
216 | CHAPTER 10


<!-- page-10 (book p.10) -->

CH
Lesson 8:
and
Review P
Display PS 10.8A Mythical or
Factual? Lead students through
the activity. Then display PS
10.8B Chapter 10 Review to
help students review the concepts
in Chapter 10. Allow students to
take turns reading the slides.
FACTS P MYTHS
Foundatons
218 | CHAPTER 10
MYTHICAL OR FACTUAL?
Students will be able to differentiate between the gospel
accounts of Jesus' life and pagan mythologies.
• Materials needed: PS 10.8A
• Time required: 20-25 minutes
1. Display PS 10.8A Mythical or Factual? Read slides
1-3 to introduce the activity to the class. Read the
instructions for the game.
2. Display slide 4. Choose a student to read the claim.
Then, display slide 5. Read the details about Jesus' life.
3. Display slide 6, which contains a comparative story
about the mythological god Horus. Once the slide has
been read, call out "Same!" Students should raise
their hand if they think the account of Jesus' life is
similar enough to the mythological god's story to be
concerned that Christians borrowed from the myth.
Then, say "Different!" Students should raise their hand
if they think the mythical god's story is significantly
different from the Christian story. Repeat the process
with the Mithras myth on slide 7.
4. Continue the activity in the same manner until
you reach slides 16 and 17, which summarize the
conclusion of activity.
5. If time allows, encourage students to consider what
they could say to someone who makes these kinds of
claims. You can also discuss whether students have
seen or heard similar skeptical claims about Jesus and
mythology before. Possible discussion questions:
• Were you intimidated by the claims?
• Did your confidence in the factual reporting of the
gospels grow through this exercise?
• How would you respond if someone said, "You
can't believe what the Bible says about Jesus: it's
just a collection of myths borrowed from other
mythologies"?
Lesson 9:
Study
Guide
Allow students to study for the
Chapter 10 Test. Have them
turn to the Study Guide in their
student manual and complete the
exercises.
Key Terms
Incarnation
kingdom of God
gospel
redemption
ascension
Key Verses
Luke 1:26-33
Luke 4:17-19
John 1:14
1 Corinthians 15:3-4
1. Explain three ways the Incarnation is significant.
The Incarnation is essential for salvation; the Incarnation affirms that
creation is good; the Incarnation means that Jesus suffers with us.
2. How does Jesus' ministry relate to the gospel and the kingdom of
God?
The kingdom of God is the just and peaceful rule of God over all
creation. To Israel, God's kingdom meant the end of exile and the
defeat of evil. It also means the forgiveness of sins and the rescue of
creation from its bondage to sin. The gospel is the good news of the
coming of the kingdom.
3. Contrast popular views of Jesus' identity with Jesus' own claim
to be the Messiah.
Popular views of Jesus' identity include seeing him as a philosopher
who said wise things and gave advice for living a good life; a charismatic
faith healer who had a mystical experience and sought to bring God's
healing to others; just one more in a long string of Jewish prophets
who announced the end of the world; a social reformer whose main
goal was to bring equality between rich and poor, the powerful and the
oppressed, and men and women. In contrast, Jesus claimed to be God
incarnate, the Messiah, and the "Son of Man," who would rescue the
world from sin and corruption.
4. Name three roles entailed in Jesus' position of Messiah.
Jesus' three roles as Messiah include prophet, priest, and king.
5. List four lessons Jesus taught about the kingdom of God through
parables.
The kingdom does not come all at once; in the present, the kingdom
does not come with irresistible power; the final judgment of the
kingdom is reserved for the future; and the full revelation of the
kingdom is postponed to allow many to enter the kingdom during the
present age.
6. Summarize the parable about the vineyard. Why did this parable
upset the religious leaders?
In the parable of the vineyard, the owner represented God, the
caretakers represented the religious leaders, the servants represented the
prophets, and the son represented Christ. The religious leaders were
angry because they knew Jesus was telling them that they would be
judged for rejecting the words of the prophets and for rejecting him.
CHAPTER 10 | 219


<!-- page-11 (book p.10) -->

CH
Lesson 9:
Study
Guide
(continued)
7. Describe two miracles Jesus accomplished and what they were a sign of.
The feeding of the five thousand and the raising of Lazarus from the dead were
two major miracles Jesus performed. They served as signs of the kingdom.
8. Briefly describe the eight categories of people that Jesus referred to as
blessed in the beatitudes.
"The poor in spirit" refers to those who are humble before God; "those who
mourn" refers to those who grieve, often in difficult situations; "the meek" refers
to those who have a gentle spirit and are not arrogant; "those who hunger and
thirst for righteousness" are people who long for God to set things right; "the
merciful" describes those who have a generous attitude and do not take revenge
or gloat over others' shortcomings; "the pure in heart" are those who are pure
inwardly, not just outwardly; "the peacemakers" refers to those who reconcile
and bring others together; "those who are persecuted for righteousness' sake"
describes disciples who suffer because of their willingness to follow God's ways.
9. Summarize the ethical teachings of the Sermon on the Mount.
Jesus said he had not come to abolish Old Testament law, but to fulfill it. His
ethical teachings all intensify the Old Testament commands, showing that
Jesus is concerned with the heart and not just our outward actions. Jesus taught
people to love their enemies, give generously, avoid judging hypocritically, and
look to God for provision and approval instead of to others.
10. Explain two aspects of Jesus' redemptive work on the cross.
First, Jesus died as our substitute, the sacrifice for our sins, receiving the
punishment that we rightly deserve. Second, Jesus defeated the enemies that
held us in bondage.
11. What are three skeptical objections to the resurrection? Give a response
to each one.
One theory was that the disciples stole the body. However, it does not seem
plausible to believe that the disciples, who all fled when Jesus was captured,
suddenly became fearless warriors who overpowered a band of Roman soldiers
and stole Jesus' body away.
Another theory is that Jesus did not really die but only swooned and was later
revived by the cool air of the tomb. The medical evidence is strongly against
this explanation. The Roman soldiers pierced his side with a spear to ensure
his death, which strengthens the case against the swoon theory. A weak and
mutilated Jesus would be unlikely to convince anyone to worship him.
Still another theory is that the disciples only hallucinated-they only thought
they were seeing Jesus alive from the dead. However, it is rare for more than one
person to have the same hallucination. Yet after his resurrection, Jesus was seen
by several groups of people, including 500 people at one time.
12. Give the most plausible explanation for the disciples' transformation.
The most plausible answer is that the disciples truly saw Jesus die and had real evidence
that he rose from the dead. The disciples were convinced and transformed by their
encounter with the living Savior.
13. Discuss two major implications of Jesus' ascension.
First, Jesus sat down at the right hand of the Father, where he reigns as King of kings.
Second, Jesus is available and accessible to anyone anywhere. We no longer need the
tabernacle or the temple.
14. What did Jesus commission his disciples to do?
Jesus commissioned his disciples to spread the gospel.
15. What is the meaning of the term the Christ?
The Christ means anointed in Greek and is another name for the Messiah.
16. What two titles did Jesus use for himself that show he claimed to be God?
Jesus used the name for God revealed to Moses: I AM. He also called himself the Son of Man,
claiming the power and authority of the Messiah.
17. What is the Golden Rule?
Treat others the way you want to be treated.
18. Explain Jesus' humanity and divinity.
Jesus is 100 percent God and 100 percent human. He was not a man-God hybrid but was
fully God, and through the Incarnation, he also became fully human.
19. Do the four Gospels agree on the divinity of Christ? How much of each Gospel is
devoted to the crucifixion?
All four Gospels are unanimous that Jesus was the God of Israel and Lord of all. Roughly
one-half of each Gospel is devoted to the death of Jesus.
20. Is God concerned with outward actions, the heart, or both? Explain.
God is not just concerned with the outward actions but with the heart as well. Jesus
extended the commands of the law in the Sermon on the Mount to include the heart.
21. What did Jesus' birth fulfill for Israel?
Jesus' birth fulfilled the prophecies and hope Israel had for a righteous leader who would
establish God's kingdom.
22. Read and study the four Key Verses listed at the beginning of the study guide.
220 | CHAPTER 10
CHAPTER 10 | 221
g Act 4: Redemption Accomplished-Jesus


<!-- page-12 (book p.10) -->

CH
10 Test P
Distribute TR 10.10A Chapter 10 Test to each student and
allow time for them to complete the exercises. Students who
finish early may start reading Chapter 11. Assign homework.
Notes
Act 5: Restoration
Initiated-The Church
222 | CHAPTER 10
