# Chapter 12

<!-- page-1 (book p.11) -->

CH
Lesson 10:
11 Test P
Distribute TR 11.10A Chapter 11 Test to each student and
allow time for them to complete the exercises. Students who
finish early may start reading Chapter 12. Assign homework.
Notes
Accomplished-
New Creation
244 | CHAPTER 11


<!-- page-2 -->

Accomplished-New Creation
Chapter 12 Syllabus
Lesson
REVIEW
WATCH
REVIEW FOR
STUDY FOR
GIVE
Assignment
Chapter 11 Test
Questions for Chapter 12.1-12.2
Activity: Restoring Hope
Chapter 12.3-12.4
Questions for Chapter 12.3-12.4
Questions for Chapter 12.3-12.4
Activity: Biblical Symbolism
Chapter 12.5-12.6
Questions for Chapter 12.5-12.6
Questions for Chapter 12.5-12.6
Activity: God's Character Bible Study
Chapter 12.7-12.8
Questions for Chapter 12.7-12.8
Questions for Chapter 12.7-12.8
Activity: Detecting Deception
Chapter 12.9-12.10
Questions for Chapter 12.9-12.10
Questions for Chapter 12.9-12.10
Activity: Face-to-Face
Activity: God's Big Story
Videos
Video Questions
Video Questions
Activity: Patient in Suffering
Study Guide Questions
Chapter 13.1-13.2
Questions for Chapter 13.1-13.2
*Student Textbook (ST) Student Manual (SM)
A full-year syllabus is available in the online resources.
246 | CHAPTER 12
Page
ST 165-167
SM 226-227
250-251
ST 168-170
SM 228-229
ST 170-172
SM 230
ST 172-175
SM 232
SM 234-236
259-261
SM 239-241
263-265
ST 176-178
SM 244
Chapter 12
OVERVIEW
While promised and proclaimed, the good
news has not yet been fully realized. We still
confidently await the day when God fulfills
his promise to make all things new. The
book of Revelation is apocalyptic literature
and explores themes of faithfulness to
Christ, suffering, final judgment, final
restoration, and Christian hope. The apostle
John wrote Revelation during a time when
Roman culture required emperor worship
for economic benefits. Christians' refusal
to participate labeled them as outsiders and
sometimes resulted in persecution.
The central images in Revelation are
God on his throne and the slain Lamb.
Jesus is the Lamb of God, the Messiah,
the true Davidic Ruler who has conquered
sin and death by his righteous life, death,
and resurrection. For now, suffering is
normative to the Christian life. Christians
can suffer with hope, trusting God for
future restoration.
Revelation contains symbolism
representing God's judgments. Some
judgments are simply people or empires
experiencing the consequences of their
actions. Judgment is not God's petty
revenge but his justice against evil. God
is patient, holding off final judgment
so many can be saved. Revelation uses
many symbolic descriptions for heaven,
hell, and the new creation. Hell is a place
where Satan and those who reject God
will experience God's judgment. Heaven is
where God dwells and is worshipped and
where believers who have died are now
present with Jesus. The new creation is the
ultimate destination for all believers, where
they will worship God, dwell with him, and
use their God-given abilities to the fullest.
God will be present with his people—no
more barriers, sin, or suffering—and
humans will flourish throughout eternity.
PREPARATION
Lesson 2:
Make a copy of TR 12.2A Biblical
Symbolism for each student. Make one
copy of the Answer Key for yourself.
Lesson 3:
Make a copy of TR 12.3A God's
Character Bible Study for each
student. Make one copy of the Answer
Key for yourself.
Lesson 4:
Make one copy of TR 12.4A Detecting
Deception. Cut it into four sections.
Computers will be needed for the
activity.
Lesson 5:
Make one copy of TR 12.5A Face-
to-Face. Cut out the strips of paper,
keeping the G statements separate from
the R statements.
Lesson 6:
Review PS 12.6A God's Big Story to
become familiar with the activity.
Lesson 7:
Access and preview the six videos listed
on Lesson 7. See the inside back cover
of this manual for instructions to stream
videos.
Lesson 8:
Computers or other reference materials
will be needed for the activity.
Lesson 10: Print a copy of TR 12.10A Chapter 12
Test for each student.
LESSON MATERIALS
Presentation Slides
PS 12.6A God's Big Story
PS 12.8A Chapter 12 Review
Teacher Resources
TR 12.2A Biblical Symbolism
TR 12.3A God's Character Bible Study
TR 12.4A Detecting Deception
TR 12.5A Face-to-Face
TR 12.10A Chapter 12 Test
CHAPTER 12 | 247


<!-- page-3 (book p.12) -->

CH
Lesson 1:
12.1-12.2
Review Chapter 11 Test. Have
students turn to page 162 in
their student textbook. Read the
objectives to the class. Go over
the answers to the Discussion
Questions for Chapter 12.1-
12.2 on page 224 in the student
manual. Have students turn
to Activity: Restoring Hope.
Read the directions. Assign the
homework.
• Students will be able to relate
redemption through Jesus
Christ to the Christian hope
of future restoration. [12.1]
• Students will be able
to explain the literary
and cultural context of
Revelation. [12.2]
1. What does the word restoration mean? Why is it a significant
word to use about the new creation? [12.1]
The word restoration comes from the word restore, which carries with
it the idea of repairing or returning something to its original state.
God doesn't simply discard broken things or people. Instead, he
desires to repair and restore them, to make them new, and to shape
them into what he created them to be. That's why the Bible's story
ends not with the destruction of this world but its restoration.
2. What does the word apocalypse mean? What is apocalyptic
literature, and what is its purpose? [12.2]
Apocalypse means revelation or unveiling. Apocalyptic literature
conveys meaning through symbol and metaphor, describes
spectacular visions that reveal the true nature of reality, and
encourages God's people by describing God's judgment on the
wicked and vindication of the righteous.
Note: Apocalyptic literature is a genre of literature that was popular
during the second temple period.
3. How is Revelation like a prophecy? [12.2]
The Old Testament prophets sometimes told of future events,
but mostly they were committed to calling the people of Israel to
repentance and covenant faithfulness to God. In Revelation, John
not only records what God revealed to him about the future but
writes in such a way as to challenge Christian communities to
remain faithful to Jesus even under persecution.
4. Describe the historical context in which the book of
Revelation was written. What similarities do you see between
Roman culture and your culture today? [12.2]
In the Roman world of the first century, the emperors were
worshipped as divine. Emperor worship, and often worship of
Roman gods, was necessary for participation in the economic
life of the Roman world. Rome was generally very tolerant of the
worship of other gods, as long as people also worshipped Caesar.
To reject the worship of Caesar, as Christians did, would have been
interpreted as a threat to social unity. During this time there was
sporadic persecution of Christians, but there was very great pressure
to conform to Roman society.
Possible answer: Regarding similarities between Roman culture
and today, praying to physical idols or a pantheon of gods may be
less common than it once was, but people have made gods out of
sexuality, self, money, power, and notoriety, each of which demands
our absolute allegiance. In the West, Christianity is tolerated as a
religion but only if it is confined to private life and doesn't challenge
the culture or ruling powers. Christians outside the West regularly
experience persecution and suffering for believing in Jesus.
FOUNDATIONS 9
10229.
binsna
RESTORING HOPE
Students will develop
1. Divide the class into four groups. Assign each group
ideas for applying
two of the Bible references listed below. Direct them
Christian hope to their
to brainstorm how they can apply their verses to
daily lives.
restoring hope in their families or communities as
they wait for God to finally restore all things.
• Materials needed: Bible,
15-20 minutes
• 2 Corinthians 1:3-4
• 2 Corinthians 10:3-5
• Philippians 2:3-4
• Colossians 3:12-13
• Colossians 3:23-24
• James 1:27
• 1 Peter 1:14-17
• 1 Peter 2:11-12
2. Have groups share their ideas with the class.
CHAPTER 12 | 249
9 Act 6: Restoration Accomplished-New Creation


<!-- page-4 (book p.12) -->

CH
Lesson 2:
12.3-12.4 P
Read the objectives to the class.
Go over the answers to the
Discussion Questions for Chapter
12.3-12.4. Have students turn to
Activity: Biblical Symbolism in
their student manual. Distribute
one copy of TR 12.2A Biblical
Symbolism to each student.
Have them read and complete the
exercises. Assign the homework.
describe the relevance of
the Lamb in the book of
Revelation. [12.3]
articulate the role of suffering
in the Christian life. [12.3]
O Students will be able to
defend the Christian view of
God's final judgment. [12.4]
250 | CHAPTER 12
1. What are the key images in the book of Revelation? [12.3]
The key images are God on the throne as the only true Ruler of the
universe and the slain Lamb.
2. What do the images of Jesus as the Lion of Judah and as the
slaughtered Lamb communicate about how Jesus conquers
evil? [12.3]
The Lion is a symbol of power and victory. Jesus is the true Victor,
the Messiah of Israel who defeated sin and death. The image of the
Lion communicates that Jesus conquers. The image of the Lamb
shows how Jesus conquers. Surprisingly, he does not conquer using
violence but by giving his own life for the sake of others. Jesus is
like a Lion in victory, but the way he wins the victory is like a slain
Lamb.
3. What is the primary way Christians follow the Lamb in the
book of Revelation? What does this mean for Christians today?
[12.3]
The followers of the Lamb are said to follow the Lamb wherever
he goes, even to death. They are willing to suffer for Jesus name
rather than surrender to or compromise with evil powers. The call
for Christians today is no less than it was then. The way of Jesus is
a road that will lead to suffering. If we are to follow the Lamb, we
must be willing to endure persecution and suffering for his name.
4. If God is on the throne as the true Ruler of the universe, how
should we relate to the nation in which we live? [12.3]
Possible answer: Throughout history, many oppressive nations and
political rulers have behaved like gods, demanding that people give
them their ultimate allegiance or participate in evil. Since God is
the supreme Ruler of all, Christians must resist these demands.
This does not mean that we reject all rulers or governments, that we
cannot love the place of our earthy origin or citizenship, or that we
refuse to get involved in the political realm. It does mean that when
any nation or political ruler demands our ultimate allegiance or
commands us to do evil, we must resist, even if it leads to scorn or
suffering. Our first allegiance must always be to God.
5. What does Babylon stand for in Revelation? [12.4]
In Revelation, Babylon stands for the Roman empire and all evil
empires that align themselves against God or set themselves up in
the place of God.
6. Do you think God can bring judgment and still be considered loving?
Why or why not? [12.4]
Possible answer: God's love is not opposed to judgment. God's judgment
is about justice, which is about setting right what is wrong. And justice is a
function of God's love. It is because God is love that he will not allow evil to run
rampant forever in his good world. It is because God is love that he will bring
judgment on those who do evil. If he did not, he would not really be a God of
love. God's judgment in Revelation also prepares the way for the new creation
where no evil thing will enter. Also, God sacrificed himself as the slaughtered
Lamb to reconcile his enemies to himself if they trust in him, which is the most
loving thing that can be done.
BIBLICAL SYMBOLISM
Students will analyze
1. Distribute one copy of TR 12.2A Biblical Symbolism
the symbolism used in
to each student. Read the directions and have
Revelation.
students write the letters representing the symbols
in the blanks next to the correct imagery in the Old
TR 12.2A and pen
15-20 minutes
Testament and Revelation.
2. Discuss the answers. If time allows, ask students why
they think that God sometimes used symbolic images
or numbers in the Bible to communicate specific
concepts.
Possible answer: It may be that God uses symbolism
to help us grasp and remember truth that is difficult
for us to understand with our limited human minds.
Note: Symbolic numbers were examined in Chapter 10.1
Activity: Symbolic Numbers.
CHAPTER 12 | 251


<!-- page-5 (book p.12) -->

CH
Lesson 3:
12.5-12.6 P
Read the objectives to the
class. Go over the answers
to the Discussion Questions
for Chapter 12.5-12.6. Have
students turn to Activity: God's
Character Bible Study in their
student manual. Distribute
a copy of TR 12.3A God's
Character Bible Study to each
student. Read the directions.
Assign the homework.
clarify the truth about hell.
[12.5]
discuss the eternal destiny of
Christians. [12.6]
252 | CHAPTER 12
1. What is the biblical view of hell? [12.5]
Hell is a place prepared for Satan and his angels and where all who
reject Christ will spend eternity. To be in hell is to be eternally
excluded from the presence of God. Hell is like living a self-absorbed,
self-centered life forever. Those in hell may have it all their own
way, but since God is the true Source of life, they will find no joy or
satisfaction.
2. Do you think the images of hellfire are literal or symbolic?
Explain. [12.5]
Possible answer: It is possible that the images of hellfire are literal.
The Bible does speak of hell as a "fiery furnace" (Matthew 13:50)
and a "lake of fire" (Revelation 20:14). However, it may also be that
they are symbolic. To say that the images are symbolic is not to say
that hell is not a real place or that it is somehow less awful. Spiritual
torment, spiritual death, and the loss of God for eternity are just as
bad as material fire, physical death, and physical torture.
3. Does God send people to hell? Explain. [12.5]
Possible answer: On one hand, hell is a place of justice, and God is
our Judge. He has authority to cast people into hell (Luke 12:5). On
the other hand, though the Bible does speak of people being cast
into the lake of fire, there is one sense in which God allows people
to choose hell. God does not force people to live in his presence, and
if people want nothing to do with God in this life, he will not force
them to spend eternity with him. Those in hell are those who have
rejected God and chosen their own way.
4. What is heaven? Are there any significant differences between
how you previously thought about heaven and how the Bible
presents it? [12.6]
Answers will vary but should include: Heaven is the place where
God dwells and is eternally worshipped. It is also the place where
believers who have died are present with Jesus until the restoration of
all things.
5. What's wrong with seeing heaven as the only goal of the
Christian life? [12.6]
Possible answer: To see heaven as the only goal of the Christian life
is to sideline the promise of new creation and our responsibilities as
Christians while living in this world. Being a Christian is not just
about getting to heaven after death but also about experiencing life in
Jesus, spreading the message of the kingdom of God, and growing in
holiness as we await the final restoration of all things.
GOD'S CHARACTER BIBLE STUDY
Students will conduct a
1. Inform students that many skeptics and even some
biblical study to resolve
Christians become confused by attributes of God that
skeptical criticisms of
seem contradictory when seen through the lens of a
God's character.
secular or postmodern worldview. But if God's big story
and the Bible's teachings about God's role and character
TR 12.3A, Bible, and pen
25-30 minutes
are taken into account, this tension can be resolved.
2. Distribute one copy of TR 12.3A God's Character Bible
Study to each student and direct them to complete the
exercises. The three steps analyze what the Bible says
about God's love and justice. Students should be able to
articulate what the Bible says about God's character and
defend the biblical view of God's justice.
3. If time allows, have the class discuss their answers.
CHAPTER 12 | 253


<!-- page-6 (book p.12) -->

CH
Lesson 4:
12.7-12.8 ₽
Read the objectives to the
class. Go over the answers to
the Discussion Questions for
Chapter 12.7-12.8. Direct
students to turn to Activity:
Detecting Deception in their
student manual. Have the four
sections of TR 12.4A Detecting
Deception ready to distribute.
Read the directions. Assign the
homework.
explain the significance of
the second coming and what
Christians should do while
awaiting Christ's return.
[12.7]
compare and contrast the
new creation described in
Revelation with the first
creation in Genesis. [12.8]
254 | CHAPTER 12
1. How does the second coming relate to believers being called
the bride of Christ? [12.7]
The Bible says Jesus is like a delayed bridegroom who will one day
come for his bride. Act 5 (Restoration Initiated-The Church)
in the biblical metanarrative is like an engagement, and Act 6
(Restoration Accomplished—New Creation) is like a wedding.
During an engagement, the bride and groom wait patiently for their
wedding day, when they are to be united permanently in love and
faithfulness to one another. In the Bible, the church is the bride
of Christ and Christ is the Groom. God loves us and desires to
be united to us for all eternity so that we might share in a perfect
relationship with the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. That is why
the second coming is a source of joy. Jesus is coming for his bride,
the church! In Revelation, the restoration is described as a joyous
wedding supper, where believers will be finally united with Christ,
the true Source of life.
2. How should we live now as we await Jesus' second coming?
[12.7]
Possible answer: Believers are to eagerly await Christ's return.
However, waiting for Jesus' return does not mean sitting idly by
while the world falls to pieces, as though it's unimportant because we
have been saved. Nor does it mean trying to figure out exactly when
he will return. To wait patiently for Christ's return is to live in hope,
proclaim the gospel, be faithful to Jesus, and work for restoration in
our communities as we anticipate the day when Jesus will make all
things new.
3. How are Genesis 1-3 and Revelation 20-22 similar? What
significant differences do you see? [12.8]
Answers should include information from the chart in Chapter
12.8 comparing similarities between the first creation and the new
creation.
4. Describe the new creation. Is it a discarding of the original
creation or a renewal of it? [12.8]
The new creation is not a discarding of God's original creation, but a
restoration and renewal of it. Nor is the new creation merely a return
to the garden of Eden. In the new creation, heaven comes to Earth
in the form of a great city, where the tree of life grows by a great
river. The new creation is a holy place where God dwells personally,
and his presence is open to all. All relationships will be restored,
there will be no more death, and humans will be given new bodies
so they can flourish under God's good rule.
DETECTING DECEPTION
Students will analyze
1. Divide the class into four groups. Give each group one
deceptive or false claims
of the Bible passages and discussion prompts from TR
about Jesus' second
12.4A Detecting Deception.
coming.
2. Give each group time to read the passages, research
the topic, and discuss the prompts.
3. Have each group share their findings with the class.
TR 12.4A, computer,
25-30 minutes
CHAPTER 12 | 255


<!-- page-7 (book p.12) -->

CH
Lesson 5:
Chapter P
12.9-12.10
Read the objective to the class.
Go over the answers to the
Discussion Questions for Chapter
12.9-12.10. Have students turn
to Activity: Face-to-Face in their
student manual. Have the strips
(Gand R statements) you cut
from TR 12.5A Face-to-Face
available. Read the directions.
Direct students to complete the
exercise.
OBJECTIVE
articulate details of the New
Jerusalem. [12.9]
256 | CHAPTER 12
1. Why isn't there a temple in the New Jerusalem? [12.9]
In the Old Testament, the temple (and the tabernacle before it) was
the place where God's presence came to dwell among his people.
Yet access was limited. Only the high priest could enter the holiest
place, and he could only enter it once a year. In the New Jerusalem,
there is no temple because God will dwell with us. There will be
no barriers to God's presence. We will dwell in his presence in total
freedom and joy.
Note: God already dwells in us, as the Holy Spirit has been given
to believers as a guarantee (2 Corinthians 1:22, 5:5). In the New
Jerusalem, we will have a fuller experience of God's presence.
2. Which aspect of the New Jerusalem are you most anticipating?
[12.9]
Answers will vary.
3. What makes the biblical metanarrative unique in contrast to
other worldviews? [12.10]
Possible answer: Most worldviews offer visions of life that claim
to provide us with meaning, purpose, and fulfillment. Some
worldviews say that the future is entirely in our hands, and we
must work to build a future utopia that we will not live to see. Our
individual stories don't really matter. Some worldviews say that
there is no overarching meaning to life or metanarrative by which
we can understand the world-there are only individual stories.
This encourages people to live solely for themselves and their own
pleasure. Christianity says that we can find meaning, purpose, and
fulfillment in becoming a part of God's story. We do not live either
to seek our own pleasure or to achieve a paradise on Earth. Instead,
we participate in God's mission and work for his kingdom, trusting
that only he can bring it about. Christianity offers hope that what
we do for God's kingdom on this earth is not in vain. Furthermore,
all who trust Christ will share in the benefits of God's new creation.
4. Think about the biblical metanarrative that we have explored
in Chapters 6-12. How would you summarize the great
biblical story? [12.10]
Answers will vary.
FACE-TO-FACE
Students will connect
key features of the
creation narrative with
characteristics of the new
creation.
TR 12.5A
20-25 minutes
1. Divide the class into two groups. Distribute the strips
of paper from TR 12.5A Face-to-Face to the students,
giving one Genesis statement (G) to each student in
one group and the correlating Revelation statement
(R) to each student in the other group. Give strips for
each group to the students in random order, making it
harder to guess which student in the opposite group
has the corresponding strip. Genesis strips contain
statements about the original creation that match
Revelation strips, which contain statements about the
new creation. Set any excess pairs of strips aside.
2. Direct the groups to form two lines that face each
other and to stand at least one arm's length from the
students next to them. Direct each student from the
Genesis group to quietly ask the student facing them
up to three yes-or-no questions about that student's
Revelation strip. For example, "Does your statement
mention Satan?" or "Does your statement talk about
walking with God?" Give students one minute to ask
their questions.
3. If the responding student says yes to most questions,
have the pair compare statements to see if the
numbers on their strips match (i.e. G12 would match
R12) and pair up if they do. If the answers are no to
most questions, they should not pair up. After the
minute is up, have students who formed a pair sit or
stand to the side and students who are not in a pair
change places with the student on their left so that
they are facing a different student in the opposite line.
This time, give students from the Revelation group
one minute to ask up to three questions. Continue in
this manner until all students have a partner.
4. Once students have found their match, pairs should
arrange themselves in order from the pair with the
earliest verse from Genesis (G1) to the pair with the
latest verse from Genesis. Then, have each pair read
their Genesis and Revelation verses aloud, starting
with the pair that has Genesis 1:1.
CHAPTER 12 | 257


<!-- page-8 (book p.12) -->

CH
Lesson 6:
Activity P
Use PS 12.6A God's Big Story
to lead students through the
activity.
OBJECTIVE
define key terms and
relate them to the biblical
metanarrative.
PREPARATION
• Materials needed: PS 12.6A,
Bible, student textbook,
45-50 minutes
PSILGA God's Big Story
258 | CHAPTER 12
GOD'S BIG STORY
1. Divide the class into three groups and have each group
use their Bible and student textbook as references.
Students may also take notes. Display slide 1 of PS
12.6A God's Big Story and read the instructions to the
students. Then display slide 2 and allow students to
briefly review the six acts of God's Big Story before
beginning the activity. The red blanks are for the two
key terms for each act.
2. Display slide 3 and have a student read the two
definitions. Give the groups three minutes to find
the correct terms and which act of the biblical
metanarrative the terms are from. Direct groups
to write their answers on a piece of paper. When
three minutes are up, direct each group to give their
answers. Display slide 4 to reveal the correct answers.
Have the class discuss the question at the bottom of
the slide.
3. Continue in the same manner until groups have found
the terms for all six acts of the metanarrative. Display
slide 15 and review the answers.
4. Display slide 16 and divide the three groups in half
to make six groups. Assign one act to each group.
Direct them to choose one Bible verse from the
corresponding chapter in the student textbook that
best demonstrates the main theme of that act. If
time allows, groups may draw a picture or diagram to
accompany their verse and theme.
5. Have each group present their verse and explain how it
relates to the main theme or message of their assigned
act in the metanarrative.
Day 7:
Videos P
In this lesson, students will view six
videos featuring Christian educators
and authors. Each expert answers
a specific worldview or apologetics
question. These videos will allow
students to expand their knowledge
and provide biblical answers to
thought-provoking questions. The
following videos will be used in
today's lesson:
1. Why Would God Allow a Place
Like Hell? (Turek, 2:38)
2. Does God Help Those Who Help
Themselves? (Mittelberg, 1:20)
3. Does God Give Us More than We
Can Handle? (Butterfield, 3:25)
4. What Is Justice? (Myers, 3:12)
5. Is Beauty Real or Is It Just
Personal Preference? (Almon,
2:45)
6. Is Heaven a Physical Place?
(Turek, 1:01)
Play the videos one at a time in
the order listed above. Before each
video, direct students to read the
questions associated with that video
in their student manual so they
know what to listen for. During
and after the video has been shown,
students should write their answers
to the Discussion Questions. It
may be necessary to play the video
again so students can answer all the
questions. Go over the questions for
the first video. Play the next video.
Continue in this manner until
the last video has been played and
questions have been discussed.
• Video 1:
Why Would God Allow a Place Like Hell?
1. Why would God allow a place like hell?
If there is an afterlife, there are only two choices: with God (heaven)
or without God (hell).
2. Why does God send people who don't want him to hell?
God will not force people into his presence against their will.
3. Does everyone want to go to heaven? Why or why not?
No. Some people want to do their own thing. They don't want God
to rule their lives.
4. How is torment different from torture?
Torment is more internally driven than externally driven.
Video 2:
Does God Help Those Who Help Themselves?
1. Where is "God helps those who help themselves" found in the
Bible?
It is not found in the Bible, though many people think it is.
2. In what way does God want to help us?
God wants to help us in situations where we are helpless.
3. What kind of people does God help in this area?
God helps people who humble themselves, ask God to save them,
and ask God to take control of their lives.
CHAPTER 12 | 259


<!-- page-9 (book p.12) -->

CH
Lesson 7:
Videos
(continued)
•
Video 3
Does God Give Us More than We Can Handle?
1. Why does God give us more than we can handle?
He does it to stretch us spiritually.
2. How is the cliché "God doesn't give us more than we can handle" often
used?
The cliché is often used to avoid doing something to help.
3. What will life be like for special needs children in the New Jerusalem?
Special needs children who have trusted Jesus will be liberated and glorified. And
we will be better equipped to love them fully as God intended.
Video 4
What Is Justice?
1. Why do Christians need to think about justice?
Christians need to think about justice because God loves justice.
2. How can you get started pursuing justice?
Start by taking action on one thing you can do now.
3. What is justice?
Justice is making things right with God. Making things right with others is part
of that.
4. What is the goal of biblical justice?
The goal of biblical justice is to help people and society become right with God.
Video 5
Is Beauty Real or Is It Just Personal Preference?
1. What is the problem with thinking beauty is subjective?
It means that beauty is not really real.
2. Is beauty objective or subjective ("in the eye of the beholder")?
Beauty is something real (objective) and in our everyday world.
3. Where does beauty come from?
It comes from something beyond us. I's grounded in God himself.
Video 6
Is Heaven a Physical Place?
1. What is the state of Christians who have already died?
They are somehow in an immaterial state in the presence of the Lord.
2. Will the new heavens and new earth be a physical place or not?
Yes, they will.
3. What kind of bodies will we have in the new heavens and new earth?
We will have physical bodies that are free from corruption.
80220.1
CHAPTER 12 | 261
ZOU CHAPTER 12


<!-- page-10 (book p.12) -->

CH
Lesson 8:
and
Review
Have students turn in their
student manual to Activity:
Patient in Suffering. Have
students work in groups of two
or three. Then display PS 12.8A
Chapter 12 Review to help
students review the concepts in
Chapter 12. Allow students to
take turns reading the slides.
Foundations
Accomplished-
Creation
262 | CHAPTER 12
PATIENT IN SUFFERING
Students will research the stories of Christians who
have been persecuted for their faith and discover how
these individuals stood firm through their hardships.
• Materials needed: computer or other reference
material, paper, and pen
• Time required: 25-30 minutes
1. Have students work with a partner. Assign each
pair one of the names listed below. Inform students
these people are Christians either from history or
the modern day who suffered intense pressure,
persecution, or martyrdom for their faith and
obedience to Jesus. Have each pair research their
assigned person.
Possible Christians to study include:
• Andrew Brunso
• Bilquis Sheikh
• Brother Yun
• John and Betty Stam
• Dietrich Bonhoeffer
• Esther Ahn Kim
• Leah Sharibu
• Catherine of Alexandria
• Polycarp
• Richard Wurmbrand
• Rivka Barry
• Watchman Nee
2. Direct partners to record information about what
helped these Christians endure and stand firm
in Christ through hardship. Some things to look
for might include: particular Bible verses, singing
praises, the prayers of other Christians, actively
sharing the gospel even under duress, and the
encouragement of other Christians.
3. Have each pair share their findings with the rest of
the class. Read John 16:33 aloud to the class. If time
allows, discuss how Jesus' teaching can encourage
Christians today.
Lesson 9:
Study
Guide
Allow students to study for the
Chapter 12 Test. Have them
turn to the Study Guide in their
student manual and complete the
exercises.
Key Terms
apocalypse
hell
heaven
second coming
Key Verses
Matthew 6:10
Acts 1:11
Romans 8:21
1 Peter 5:10
Revelation 21:5
1. Relate redemption through Jesus to the Christian hope of future
restoration.
Because God has been faithful to his promises and Jesus accomplished
our redemption through his death and resurrection, Christians can
have great hope that God will make all things new.
2. Explain the literary and cultural context of Revelation.
Revelation is apocalyptic literature and prophecy. The author, John,
drew heavily on the prophetic books of Ezekiel, Isaiah, and Daniel.
The book was an encouragement to the church to remain faithful to
Christ. Revelation encouraged Christians who were facing sporadic
persecution and pressure to conform to Roman culture, especially
emperor worship.
3. What is the relevance of the Lamb in the book of Revelation?
John saw a Lamb that had been slaughtered, which is a representation
of Christ, who gave his life as an atoning sacrifice to pay for our sins.
The Lamb is a central image in the book of Revelation. Only the Lamb
is worthy to open the scroll and initiate God's plan for restoring the
earth. John encourages his readers to follow the Lamb and be faithful
in suffering.
4. What is the role of suffering in the Christian life?
Suffering is a normal part of the Christian life. Jesus suffered and his
followers will too. Christians learn to be patient and faithful to God in
suffering.
5. Defend the Christian view of God's final judgment.
Some judgments in Revelation are not so much God striking people
down as they are the consequences of the actions of wicked people or
empires. When people reject God's ways, disastrous consequences are
inevitable. God's final judgment is not his revenge on people he does
not like but rather is his justice against evil.
6. What is the truth about hell?
Hell is a place where all who reject Christ spend eternity excluded from
God's presence. It is a real and terrible place but is not a place where
God enjoys torturing people, as some imagine. Hell is necessary as a
consequence for evil and as a place where people who reject God are
not forced into his presence. God is the Source of life, love, joy, and
satisfaction, which won't be available in hell because it is separated
from God's presence. In a way, people choose to go to hell, which is
an unending trajectory of selfishness and its consequences. If someone
doesn't want God in this life, why would they want him in the next?
CHAPTER 12 | 263


<!-- page-11 (book p.12) -->

CH
Lesson 9:
Study
Guide
(continued)
7. What is the eternal destiny of Christians?
Heaven is where God is eternally worshipped. Christians who have died are present
there with Christ, but their final destination is the new creation. The new creation,
also called the new heaven and new earth, is a place where all things are restored and
where God will meet and dwell with his people.
8. What is the significance of the second coming, and what should Christians
do while awaiting Christ's return?
Jesus' second coming is good news for the church because believers will rule with
him throughout eternity. This is the beginning of the restoration. Christians should
not try to predict when Christ will return or sit around and do nothing waiting for
him. We should preach the good news and work for healing and restoration in this
world as much as we can. We should wait faithfully in obedience to Jesus every day.
9. Compare and contrast the new creation described in Revelation with the first
creation in Genesis 1-3.
Answer should include some combination of the information from the chart below.
GENESIS 1-3
"In the beginning, God created the heavens
and the earth." (Gen. 1:1)
"The darkness he called Night." (Gen. 1:5)
REVELATION 20-22
"I saw a new heaven and a new earth."
(Rev. 21:1)
"God made two great lights." (The sun
and the moon, Gen. 1:16)
"In the day that you eat from it, you shall
surely die." (Gen. 2:17)
Satan appears as the deceiver of
humankind. (Gen. 3:1)
Humans are given a garden, into which
defilement entered (Gen. 3:6-7)
Human fellowship with God is disrupted.
(Gen. 3:8-10)
The serpent initially triumphs. (Gen. 3:13)
"I will surely multiply your pain."
(Gen. 3:16)
"Cursed is the ground because of you."
(Gen. 3:17)
Sin and death enter the world in the fall of
the first man, Adam. (Gen. 3:17-19)
"There will be no night there." (Rev. 21:25)
"The city has no need of sun nor moon."
(Rev. 21:23)
There will be no more death, nor sorrow.
(Rev. 21:4)
Satan is sent away forever. (Rev. 20:10)
Redeemed humans are given a city, where
nothing that defiles shall enter. (Rev. 21:10, 27)
God dwelling with human beings is fully
restored (Rev. 21:3)
The Lamb triumphs over the serpent.
(Rev. 20:10; 22:3)
There will be no more pain. (Rev. 21:4)
The first paradise is closed (Gen. 3:23)
Access to the tree of life is disinherited in
Adam. (Gen. 3:24)
Humans were driven from God's presence.
(Gen. 3:24)
There will be no more curse on the earth.
(Rev. 22:3)
Sin and death are ended in the rule of the
second Adam, Christ. (Rev. 22:5)
The new paradise is opened. (Rev. 21:25)
Access to the tree of life is reinstated in Christ.
(Rev. 22:14)
"They will see his face." (Rev. 22:4)
10. Describe the New Jerusalem.
In the New Jerusalem, the barrier of sin that came between God and humans will be
completely abolished. The New Jerusalem is open to all followers of the Lamb. There will
be no prejudice, division, pain, suffering, or evil. All will worship God together, and he will
dwell with us. There will be no more wars, and we will have meaningful work to do in this
beautiful city.
11. What does apocalypse mean?
Apocalpse means revelation, unveiling, or uncovering.
12. What are the two central images in the book of Revelation?
The two central images are the slaughtered Lamb and God on his throne.
13. What is the most common role of prophets and prophetic literature?
Prophets and prophetic literature most often call God's people to faithfulness and
obedience.
14. What is the "way of the Lamb"?
The way of the Lamb is the way of suffering.
15. What do the four horsemen of Revelation represent?
The four horsemen represent intense death and destruction brought to the earth.
16. What does Revelation teach us about suffering?
Revelation teaches us to be faithful to Christ in suffering and persecution.
17. What choice is part of the dignity of human beings?
The choice is to love God or to reject God.
18. What do terms kingdom of God and kingdom of heaven refer to?
These terms refer to God's righteous rule, not to heaven.
19. What are God's promises to Christians about suffering?
God does not promise to keep Christians from suffering, but he does promise to be with
us, that we will be vindicated, and that our place is secure in God's coming kingdom.
20. Read and study the five Key Verses listed at the beginning of the study guide.
CHAPTER 12 | 265
264 | CHAPTER 12


<!-- page-12 (book p.12) -->

CH
Lesson 10:
12 Test P
Distribute TR 12.10A Chapter 12 Test to each student and
allow time for them to complete the exercises. Students who
finish early may start reading Chapter 13. Assign homework.
Notes
266 | CHAPTER 12
Who God Is
