# Chapter 13

<!-- page-1 (book p.12) -->

CH
12 Test P
Distribute TR 12.10A Chapter 12 Test to each student and
allow time for them to complete the exercises. Students who
finish early may start reading Chapter 13. Assign homework.
Notes
266 | CHAPTER 12


<!-- page-2 (book p.1) -->

Chapter 13 Syllabus
Lesson
REVIEW
WATCH
REVIEW FOR
STUDY FOR
GIVE
Assignment
Chapter 12 Test
Questions for Chapter 13.1-13.2
Activity: Are All Believers in God Christians?
Chapter 13.3-13.4
Questions for Chapter 13.3-13.4
Questions for Chapter 13.3-13.4
Activity: Random or Design?
Chapter 13.5-13.6
Questions for Chapter 13.5-13.6
Questions for Chapter 13.5-13.6
Activity: Revealing God's Nature
Chapter 13.7-13.8
Questions for Chapter 13.7-13.8
Questions for Chapter 13.7-13.8
Activity: Defending the Trinity
Chapter 13.9-13.10
Questions for Chapter 13.9-13.10
Questions for Chapter 13.9-13.10
Activity: Why Worship God?
Activity: Who God Is
Videos
Video Questions
Video Questions
Activity: Names of God
Study Guide Questions
Chapter 14.1-14.2
Questions for Chapter 14.1-14.2
*Student Textbook (ST) Student Manual (SM)
A full-year syllabus is available in the online resources.
268 | CHAPTER 13
Page
ST 178-180
SM 246
ST 181-183
SM 248-249
ST 183-185
SM 250
ST 185-187
SM 252-253
SM 255-257
281-283
SM 261-263
285-287
ST 188-191
SM 266-267
Chapter 13
OVERVIEW
While most Americans believe in God, they
do not necessarily believe in the same type
of God. Some believe he is authoritative,
some believe he is benevolent, others feel
he is distant, yet others think he is critical.
Our view of God both affects and is affected
by the way we live. Everyone thinks about
God and God's relation to the world; even
atheists think about God. But who is God
really?
Perfect being theology describes God
as the greatest possible being. While it is
impossible to know everything about God, it
is possible to know God because he chooses
to reveal himself to us through creation, the
Bible, and through his Son, Jesus Christ.
God has many attributes that make him
the unique Person that he is. God's aseity
means he is self-existent and self-sufficient.
He is spirit and incarnate in Christ,
therefore taking on human form. God is
personal; he isn't a force to be used. He
wants to be known by and have a personal
relationship with his children. God is eterna,
omnipotent, omniscient, and omnipresent.
Other characteristics that make God unique
are his immutability, holiness, righteousness,
wisdom and boundless loving nature.
God's triunity is often difficult to
understand. The doctrine of the Trinity
states that God is one Being in three
Persons: Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. This
contradicts other beliefs such as tritheism,
which falsely claims that God is composed
of three separate and distinct gods, and
modalism, the heretical belief that the Trinity
is composed of one God who over time
presents himself in three different modes
(Father, Son, and Holy Spirit).
While the word Trinity is not found
in the Bible, the truth of it is confirmed
throughout the Old and New Testaments.
Why should that matter? Because the Trinity
makes Christianity distinct!
5 Who God Is
PREPARATION
Lesson 2:
View PS 13.2A Random or Design?
to become familiar with the activity.
Access and preview a short online
video about one of the following
topics: ATP synthase, DNA replication,
or bacterial flagella motor mechanism.
Lesson 4:
Make a copy of TR 13.4A Muslim View
of the Trinity for each student.
Lesson 6:
Make a copy of TR 13.6A Chart and
Word Sneak Tracker for each group
of four to five students. View PS 13.6A
Who God Is to become familiar with
the activity.
Access and preview the six videos
listed on Lesson 7. See the inside back
cover of this manual for instructions to
stream videos.
Lesson 8:
Computers will be needed for this
activity.
Print a copy of TR 13.10A Chapter 13
Test for each student.
LESSON MATERIALS
Presentation Slides
PS 13.2A Random or Design?
PS 13.6A Who God Is
PS 13.8A Chapter 13 Review
Teacher Resources
TR 13.4A Muslim View of the Trinity
TR 13.6A Chart and Word Sneak Tracker
TR 13.10A Chapter 13 Test
CHAPTER 13 | 269


<!-- page-3 (book p.13) -->

CH
Lesson 1:
13.1-13.2
Review Chapter 12 Test. Have
students turn to page 176 in
their student textbook. Read the
objectives to the class. Go over
the answers to the Discussion
Questions for Chapter 13.1-
13.2 on page 244 in the student
manual. Have students turn
to Activity: Are All Believers
in God Christians? Read
the directions. Assign the
categorize four ways in which
people view God. [13.1]
O Students will be able to
conclude it is possible to
know God as he reveals
himself to us in scripture.
[13.2]
270 | CHAPTER 13
1. What is the first thing that comes into your mind when you
think about God? [13.1]
2. Consider the four categories of beliefs about God. How might
believing each of these affect the way that a person lives? [13.1]
Possible answers:
• Those who believe in an engaged and authoritative God may be
more inclined to serve him and pay attention to his commands,
expecting rewards for obedience and judgment for disobedience.
• Those who believe in an engaged and nonjudgmental God may
pray to God occasionally when they are in need, but may not pay
much attention to God in their day-to-day lives.
• Those who believe in a disengaged and critical God may become
plagued by guilt and spend their lives trying to make God happy.
Others may choose to rebel against God and defy him.
• Those who see God as distant and nonjudgmental probably wont
be too concerned with God at all since they see him as basically
irrelevant to modern life.
Note: The categories presented in Chapter 13.1 assume a
monotheistic society. They do not address polytheism or atheism,
which are minority views in the US.
3. What is perfect being theology? Is it possible to know
anything about God at all? If not, why not? If so, how can we
know God? [13.2]
Perfect being theology is a view that defines God as the greatest
possible being. We cannot know everything there is to know about
God. However, that does not mean that God cannot be known at
all. God chooses to reveal himself through Jesus, through creation,
and through the Scriptures. So, while our understanding will always
be limited, we can truly know some things about God because they
have been revealed.
4. Why do you think God chose to reveal himself to us? [13.2]
Possible answer: God is love and wants to share his love with others.
He reveals himself to us because he desires relationship with us.
God wants us to know him and experience the love he shares in the
Trinity.
ARE ALL BELIEVERS IN GOD CHRISTIANS?
Students will conclude
1. Divide the class into four groups. Have students
whether all believers in
discuss the following question with their group: Is
God are Christians.
there a difference between a Christian and someone
who just believes in God? Encourage groups to take
notes on their conversation.
• Materials needed: Bible,
paper, and pen
20-25 minutes
2. After a few minutes, assign groups one of each of the
following verses: James 2:19, Luke 18:9-14, John 3:1-
5, and 1 John 5:3. Direct groups to read and discuss
their assigned verses in relation to the question above.
3. Have someone from the group assigned James 2:19
read it aloud. Discuss with the class what this verse
says about just believing in God.
4. Have someone from the group with Luke 18:9-14 read
it aloud. Discuss with the class the difference between
the Pharisee, a believer in God and "religious person,"
and the repentant tax collector.
5. Have someone from the group with John 3:1-5 read it
aloud. Ask what this passage says is necessary to enter
the kingdom of God. Can someone who only believes
in God enter the kingdom of heaven?
6. Have someone from the group with 1 John 5:3 read it
aloud. Ask how this verse implies that there is more to
being a Christian than just believing in God.
7. Read 1 John 3:23-24 to the class. Discuss how this
verse summarizes what it means to be a Christian.
What are the factors of the commandment stated
in this verse? Return to the original question and
have students share what they now think about the
difference between a Christian and someone who just
believes in God.
CHAPTER 13 | 271
FOUNDATIONS 9


<!-- page-4 (book p.13) -->

CH
Lesson 2:
13.3-13.4 P
Questions for Chapter 13.3-
13.4. Have students turn to
Activity: Random or Design?
in their student manual. Read
the directions. Use PS 13.2A
Random or Design? for the
activity. Have the video you
selected ready to play. Assign the
determine that God is self-
existent, personal, spirit, and
incarnate in Jesus. [13.3]
discuss God's eternality,
omniscience, omnipotence,
omnipresence, and
immutability. [13.4]
Image l
272 | CHAPTER 13
1. Why is it important to say that God is self-existent? [13.3]
If God were not self-existent, that would mean that he was caused
by some being other than God and more powerful than God, which
would mean that the Bible's description of him as the one true God
would be false. As a self-existent being, God does not require the
existence of anyone or anything else to be who he is, which makes
him utterly unique and supreme in the universe.
2. If God is pure spirit, how do you explain the fact that Jesus is
God? [13.3]
To say that God is a spirit is to say that he is not bound by time
or space or subject to human limitations. Yet, this does not mean
God is an energy or a force. Jesus reveals that God is a person to be
known and loved. So, while God the Father is invisible, Jesus (who
is himself God) became human to make known to us what God is
really like.
3. Think about the force in the Star Wars movies. What kind of
God would God be if he were a force? How does the Bible's
description of God differ from the force? [13.3]
In Star Wars theology, good and evil are really two sides of the
same coin. The goal is balance (though in actual practice, Star
Wars characters seem to battle against evil with the intention of
eradicating it). The force is powerful, but it is not personal. It is not
a person that can known or loved, but a power that can be harnessed
for one's own ends. In contrast, the God of Christianity is a person.
As a person, he is capable of giving and receiving love, hearing our
prayers, and doing something about evil himself. The God of the
Bible cannot be used or manipulated for our own ends. He works to
accomplish his own good purposes.
4. Why is it important that God is unchanging? [13.4]
Possible answer: One of the ways that trust is built with another
person is through experience of constancy. When a person is always
changing, treating us as their best friend one day and ignoring us the
next, it is impossible for trust to be built. In the same way, if God
changed, it would be hard to really get to know him. Furthermore,
we could not trust him because he might go back on his promises or
suddenly change his mind about loving us.
RANDOM OR DESIGN?
Students will examine the evidence of
design and defend the position that
there is a designer.
• Materials needed: PS 13.2A; online video
selected on one of the following topics:
ATP synthase, DNA replication, or bacterial
flagella motor mechanism; and pen
• Time required:25-30 minutes
1. Explain to students that you are going to show a series of objects or patterns. Have students
assign a score from 1-5 based on their confidence that the object was designed versus a product
of random natural processes or chance. A score of one corresponds to complete confidence in
lack of design, and a score of five corresponds to complete confidence in design.
2. Display PS 13.2A Random or Design. As you show each image, direct students to write their score
next to that image number in their student manual.
3. After students have written their score for Image 1, have them stand up. Inform them you will
count from 1-5. When students hear the number corresponding to their score, direct them to sit
down. Have students notice how many of them were confident there was a lack of design and
how many had complete confidence there was design.
4. Continue in this manner with the rest of the images. Have students look at their nine scores and
notice any pattern in their confidence levels. Ask if the first few images tended to have lower
scores. Did the last few have higher scores? Discuss reasons why students knew the last two
images (if not more) were designed as compared to the more ambiguous ones.
Common responses include:
• the improbability of the object
forming by chance
• differences between the object and
the surrounding environment
• the inability of natural processes to
generate the pattern
• similarities between the object and
other known objects or patterns
Images:
1. Mars landscape
2. Wave Rock, Australia
3. Queens Head, Taiwan
4. Blue Horsehead Nebula
5. Computer generated
3D design made with
cube-shaped particles
6. Peacock butterfly
7. Nautilus shell
8. Easter Island statues
9. Angel statue, Germany
• evidence of purposeful intent
5. Show the video you selected and ask students to assess whether the object is the product of
natural processes and chance or the product of intelligent design based on the criteria they just
identified. Most students will choose design. Ask what led to their conclusion. The answers are
generally the same as for the obviously designed objects shown on PS 13.2A.
6. Invite a few students to share their thoughts about design in life. Conclude the presentation by
explaining that design in life is self-evident. We are not the product of blind, undirected forces,
but rather we are the creation of a Designer.
Note: If students would like to explore this subject further, have them research William Dembski's
explanatory filter or Michael Behe and the principle of intelligent design.
g Who God Is
CHAPTER 13 | 273


<!-- page-5 (book p.13) -->

CH
Lesson 3:
13.5-13.6
Questions for Chapter 13.5-
13.6. Have students turn to
Activity: Revealing God's
Nature in their student manual.
Read the directions. Assign the
explain that God is holy,
wise, righteous, and loving.
[13.5]
summarize the doctrine of
the Trinity and argue that
tritheism and modalism are
false beliefs. [13.6]
274 | CHAPTER 13
1. Why do you think that fear (reverence) of the Lord is where
true knowledge starts? [13.5]
Possible answer: If God is the source of all knowledge and wisdom,
then it makes sense that to gain true knowledge we must know God.
True wisdom begins with humility. When we recognize that we are
finite and limited in our understanding, we turn to God as the source
of all knowledge. To reverence and fear God is to recognize our
dependence on him and humbly look to him for instruction.
2. What does it mean to say that God is righteous? [13.5]
To say that God is righteous is to affirm that he is just and morally
pure. God does right by everyone. He cannot be bribed or bullied
into committing injustice or turning a blind eye to evil. He is in
the business of righting wrongs both in our hearts and in the world.
We have all failed to be righteous. That is why Jesus gives us his
righteousness when we put our trust in him.
3. It is one thing to believe that God is love and another to
experience God's love. How have you experienced God's love in
your own life? [13.5]
4. What does it mean to say that God is triune? [13.6]
The Trinity is a biblical doctrine (though the word Trinity is not used in
Scripture), that teaches God is one Being in three Persons. There is only
one God that exists in a relationship of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.
5. What is wrong with the analogy that compares the Trinity to an
egg? [13.6]
The egg analogy compares the components of an egg (shell, yolk, and
white) to the three Persons of the Trinity. The three distinct parts of
an egg add up to a complete egg, but they are not equal. However, the
separate Persons of the Trinity are one Being, though each member is
an equal but distinct Person. Therefore, to say that the Trinity is like
an egg is to flirt with the idea of tritheism, which is the belief in three
separate and distinct gods.
6. What is wrong with the analogy that compares the Trinity to
the three states of water? [13.6]
Water can appear in three separate forms solid, liquid, and gas— yet
all still technically water. This analogy leads to modalism, the belief that
the Trinity is composed of one God who over time presents himself in
three different modes-that is, sometimes God appears as the Father,
sometimes as the Son, and sometimes as the Holy Spirit. However,
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are not three different ways that God
sometimes shows up; rather, they are three distinct but equal Persons
who simultaneously share a relationship of love with one another.
REVEALING GOD'S NATURE
Students will analyze Scriptures
• Materials needed: Bible and pen
about God's nature.
• Time required: 15-20 minutes
1. Have students use their Bibles to read the verses listed below. After each verse, have
them determine which characteristic of God-holiness, wisdom, righteousness, or love-
the passage is describing. Direct students to write that characteristic on the blank line
next to the verse. Emphasize that this is a competition and students are not to discuss
their thoughts with others at this time.
2. Once the eight verses have been read and characteristics have been chosen, discuss the
answers with the class. Direct students to put a checkmark next to any they got right
and tally up how many out of eight they got correct.
3. If more than one student got all eight correct, have those students read the tiebreaker
verse-Jeremiah 29:11-and write down the characteristic. Inform them that the correct
answer is love. Students with incorrect answers are out of the game.
4. If there is only one student left, he or she is the winner. If more than one student got
the first tiebreaker verse correct, have those students read Isaiah 50:8 and write the
characteristic it refers to. Inform them of that the answer is righteousness. Any students
who have all ten verses correct are the winners. Consider awarding them a special
privilege such as one no-homework day.
CHARACTERISTIC OF GOD
Verse
Psalm 147:5
1 Thessalonians 5:23
Ephesians 2:5
Habakkuk 1:13
Romans 8:33
1 Peter 5:7
Job 8:3
Isaiah 40:28
TOTAL CORRECT
Characteristic
wisdom
holiness
holiness
wisdom
verse
TIEBREAKERS
Jeremiah 29:11
Isaiah 50:8
Characteristic
CHAPTER 13 | 275
© Who God Is


<!-- page-6 (book p.13) -->

CH
Lesson 4:
13.7-13.8
Questions for Chapter
13.7-13.8. Have students turn
to Activity: Defending the
Trinity in their student manual.
Have copies of TR 13.4A
Muslim View of the Trinity
ready. Read the directions.
Assign the homework.
• Students will be able to use
Old Testament verses to
support that God is three
Persons in one. [13.7]
identify New Testament
verses that confirm God is
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.
[13.8]
View of the Trinit
276 | CHAPTER 13
1. Look up the verses in Chapter 13.7. How are the Father, Son,
and Holy Spirit described in the Old Testament? [13.7]
In the Old Testament, God is described as a loving Parent, a Father,
and a Protector of the people of Israel. The Son is promised by the
prophet Isaiah and described as Immanuel (God with us), wonderful
Counselor, mighty God, everlasting Father, and Prince of peace.
The Spirit is described as hovering over the waters at Creation,
anointing the Messiah, resting on God's servants, empowering them
for mission, and manifesting God's attributes of omnipresence and
omnipotence.
2. Look up the relevant verses about the Father referenced
in Chapter 13.8. How is the Father described in the New
Testament? [13.8]
The Father affirms Jesus and validates his ministry. Jesus frequently
refers to God as his Father, prays to him, and works together with
him. The Father sends the Spirit to indwell believers. In the epistles,
God becomes the Father of all those who trust in Jesus. He is
described as the Creator, the one who can be prayed to, and the one
who chooses believers.
3. Look up the relevant verses about the Son referenced in
Chapter 13.8. How is the Son described in the New Testament?
[13.8]
Before his birth, Jesus was called Immanuel (God with us). He is also
described as the Word of God who was with God at the creation
of the world, and is, in fact, God himself. Jesus received worship
as God when Thomas called him "my Lord and my God" (John
20:28). He is recognized as "God over all" (Romans 9:5) and the one
who will return in glory. Hebrews 1:3 calls him the "radiance of the
glory of God and the exact imprint of his nature," as well as the one
who upholds the universe.
4. Look up the relevant verses about the Spirit referenced
in Chapter 13.8. How is the Spirit described in the New
Testament? [13.8]
The Spirit displays God's attributes of omniscience, omnipotence,
and omnipresence. The Spirit is described as a person who can be
lied to and grieved. The Spirit is also active in the church and in
individual believers, cleansing and sanctifying them.
DEFENDING THE TRINITY
Students will defend
1. Distribute TR 13.4A Muslim View of the Trinity to
the Christian Trinity
each student. Have students take turns reading the
in relation to Muslim
information. Discuss the differences between the
doctrine.
Christian Trinity and the Muslim view that there is no
Trinity.
2. Assign students to write a 150- to 200-word paragraph
• Materials needed:
TR 13.4A, Bible, student
textbook, paper, and
pen
20-30 minutes
defending the Trinity-one God in three Persons.
Students may use their Bible, textbook, and TR 13.4A
as resources.
3. If time allows, have students read their paragraph to
the class.
CHAPTER 13 | 277
g Who God Is


<!-- page-7 (book p.13) -->

CH
Lesson 5:
13.9-13.10
Read the objective to the class.
Go over the Discussion Questions
for Chapter 13.9-13.10. Have
students turn to Activity: Why
Worship God in their student
manual. Read the directions.
OBJECTIVE
• Students will be able to give
reasons why the Trinity is
important to the Christian
faith. [13.9]
278 | CHAPTER 13
1. How does the Trinity make a difference in how we view God?
[13.9]
If God were not a Trinity, but a solitary deity, he could be inherently
powerful, but he could not be inherently loving. In order to love,
one must have someone or something else to love. Without the
Trinity, God would have no one to love before creation, and thus
would need us to be who he is. However, the Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit shared a relationship of love before anything else was made.
The Trinity affirms that God is inherently loving.
2. How does Jesus share the life of the Trinity with us? [13.9]
Jesus is the one who reveals what God is really like. He shares the
Father's love with us, offers salvation so that we might enter the
joyous life of the Trinity, and shows us how to be the loving, others-
centered image-bearers we were created to be. Through his own
example, he demonstrates how we can imitate the Father through
the power of the Spirit.
3. What difference does the Trinity make for our communities?
[13.9]
God's trinitarian nature includes both unity (one God) and diversity
(Father, Son, and Holy Spirit). The Trinity is characterized by love
and harmony. In the same way, our churches should be made up
of people from all walks of life who are united under the banner of
Jesus. In the church, God brings together people from diverse social,
economic, and ethnic backgrounds, with different personalities and
gifts so that they can all live and worship together in unity.
4. What questions or concerns do you have about the Trinity?
[13.9]
5. What should good theology ultimately lead to? [13.10]
Good theology invites us into a personal relationship with God.
It also leads us to worship and devotion. Good theology should
increase our desire for God and inspire us to love him with our
whole selves. It is more than academics; it is learning to love and
cherish God.
6. What do you think about the God revealed in Scripture and
discussed in this chapter? [13.10]
WHY WORSHIP GOD?
Students will list reasons to
1. Divide the class into groups of four or five. Challenge
worship God.
groups to make a list of as many reasons they can
think of to worship God. (Hint: God's characteristics
provide good reasons to worship him.) This will be a
• Materials needed: Bible,
student textbook, paper,
and pen
15-20 minutes
race.
2. Students may use their Bible and textbook for help.
Groups will have 10 minutes to make their lists. The
goal is to end up with the most reasons that other
groups do not have listed.
3. Someone from the group with the most reasons listed
will read them off one by one. If another group has
that same reason, all the groups are to cross it off
their lists. Make sure students' answers are legitimate
reasons to worship God.
4. If another group has reasons that have not been
crossed off, allow someone to read those items.
Groups will cross off any reasons that are duplicated.
5. Continue in this manner until all reasons have been
read. The group with the most reasons that have not
been crossed off wins the challenge.
CHAPTER 13 | 279


<!-- page-8 (book p.13) -->

CH
Lesson 6:
Have students turn to Activity:
Who God Is in their student
manual. Provide one copy of
TR 13.6A Chart and Word
Sneak Tracker for each group
of four or five students. Once
students have completed the
activity, use PS13.A Who
God Is to discuss the answers.
Note that this is a challenging
activity that gives students the
opportunity to collaborate,
discuss, and integrate key terms
from the student textbook
while they discuss the nature
of God.
OBJECTIVE
• Students will synthesize
key terms they have learned
during this course to make a
conclusion about who God
PREPARATION
• Materials needed: TR
13.6A, PS 13.6A, student
textbook, and pencil
• Time required: 45-50
minutes
R13.64 Chart and Word Sneak Track
I CHAPTER 13
WHO GOD IS
1. Divide the class into groups of four or five students.
Distribute one copy of TR 13.6A Chart and Word Sneak
Tracker to each group. Have groups appoint a Word Sneak
secretary who will track the words being used in group
conversation on the Word Sneak Tracker. Each time a
word on the tracker is included as an answer on a chart,
the secretary will place a tally mark next to that word on
the tracker. Any form of the word is acceptable. (Example:
exists, existed, existence
2. The chart has three columns: Perfect Being Theory, Aseity,
and Doctrine of the Trinity. Each student will complete
their own chart but they will work together as a group to
discuss their answers. They may also use their textbook
as they discuss how to complete the charts. Each chart
contains a section for the definition, characteristics,
examples, and false ideas. The key terms modalism and
tritheism must appear appropriately within each chart.
3. Students are to incorporate the Word Sneak words
appropriately as they discuss and write answers for each
chart section. The goal is to use as many Word Sneak
words as they can. For example, someone might say,
"Perfect being theology describes how God is infinite and
perfect in love, goodness, holiness, and wisdom." This
should be written on the Characteristics section of the
chart. The Word Sneak secretary will then mark the words
used on the word tracker. Students may reuse words and
will make a tally mark for each use. Students in the group
will assist the secretary as needed to fill out the Word
Tracker while the words are being used on the charts.
4. Allow 30 minutes for groups to complete the chart. Then
have the Word Sneak secretaries total the number of
words used by counting the tally marks and recording the
chart total on the Word Sneak Tracker.
5. Display PS 13.6A Who God Is. These slides provide
examples of answers for each chart. Students' answers
don't have to match exactly. Have students count the
number of bolded words on the slides that match the ones
they used on their charts to see how well their group did.
6. Have the secretaries share the chart total on their Word
Sneak Tracker. The group with the most words used is the
winner. Consider awarding the winning group a special
privilege.
7. Lead the class to discuss how the information from this
chart could be used to respond to someone who believes
that God is distant and disengaged from humans.
Videos P
In this lesson, students will view
six videos featuring Christian
educators and authors. Each expert
answers a specific worldview
or apologetics question. The
following videos will be used in
today's lesson:
1. Who Created God? (Travis,
2. Does Intelligent Design Prove
that the Christian God Exists?
(Travis, 2:01)
3. What Is the Trinity? (Wilson,
2:24)
4. Is Belief in the Trinity Irrational?
(Wilson, 0:59)
5. How's Christianity Relevant to
Me? (Shlemon, 3:48)
6. What's a "Relationship with
God"? (Bywater, 2:53)
Play the videos one at a time in
the order listed above. Before each
video, direct students to read the
questions associated with that
video in their student manual
so they know what to listen for.
During and after the video has
been shown, students should write
their answers to the Discussion
Questions. Go over the questions
for the first video. Before playing
the second video, explain that
intelligent design is the theory that
life and certain features of the
universe were designed and created
by some intelligent entity, not by
random chance or an undirected
process such as natural selection.
Play the second video and discuss
the questions. Continue in this
manner until the last video has
been played and all questions have
been discussed.
© Who God Is
• Video 1:
Who Created God?
1. What do Christians often say about the beginning of all
things?
There has to be a cause for all things, so ultimately that cause must
be God.
2. How do some nonbelievers respond to that reasoning?
According to the speaker, "If all things that exist need to have a
cause, then you can't exempt God from that. Therefore, God must
have a cause, so what was the cause of God?"
3. What do Christians mean when they say all things had to have
a cause?
Christians actually mean that all things that have ever come into
being had to have a cause.
4. Why is God exempt from having to have a cause?
God, by definition, is not an entity that came into being. God
is eternal, which means he is timeless and without a beginning.
Therefore, it is not necessary to define a cause for that entity.
• Video 2:
Does Intelligent Design Prove that the Christian God Exists?
1. What is the benefit of intelligent design theory?
The theory begins with evidence that everyone can observe and agree
on. It gives common ground, even for those who are nonbelievers.
2. How does intelligent design relate to being made in the image
of God?
Intelligent design can make a case for humans having a special place
in the grand scheme of things. Human beings are rational, sharing
this characteristic with God. This resonates with humans being made
in the image of God.
3. What does Romans 1:20 say about people and the created
world?
People are able to observe the created world and discern something
about God. We can get glimpses about who God is.
4. What are your thoughts on intelligent design? Do you think it
is a good starting point for a conversation about a Designer/
Creator? Why or why not?
CHAPTER 13 | 281


<!-- page-9 (book p.13) -->

CH
Videos
(continued)
Video 3
What Is the Trinity?
1. What does the speaker say the Trinity is? What is another name for the
Trinity?
The Trinity is a doctrine of the church that says God is three distinct Persons but
one God. The Trinity is also called the Godhead.
2. What three New Testament Scriptures did the speaker use to reference the
three distinct Persons of the Trinity as God?
• Philippians 1: God the Father
• Titus 2: God the Son
• Acts 5: God the Holy Spirit
3. In which verse did the speaker say all three distinct Persons are referenced
as one?
Matthew 28:19
4. Is the doctrine of the Trinity difficult for you to comprehend? Explain.
Note: Before playing the next video, consider having students look up
Philippians 1:2; Titus 2:10, 13; Acts 5:3-4, 9; these are the exact Scripture
references for the three distinct Persons of God. Have them underline the verses
in their Bible.
Video 4
Is Belief in the Trinity Irrational?
1. Is it irrational to believe in the doctrine of the Trinity?
A belief in the doctrine of the Trinity is irrational only if someone is willing to
deny Scripture.
2. How can you support a belief in the Trinity?
Possible answer: Believing in the resurrection of Jesus, the creation story, and any
of the other miracles in the Bible takes faith. Believing what the Bible says about
God being three distinct Persons yet one God would be a matter of faith as well.
Video 5
How's Christianity Relevant to Me?
1. Why is Christianity important to believers?
It speaks to all aspects of our lives.
2. Do the aspects of Christianity have any practical application in our lives?
Absolutely! The principles that the Bible teaches aren't just true, they should
affect the way we live.
3. One of the foundational concepts of Christianity is that human beings are
made in the image of God. What implications does this have?
All persons, not just Christians, are intrinsically valuable. We are valuable in and
of ourselves because we have God's image stamped on our souls.
4. How are we supposed to apply that fact to our daily lives?
We are to treat all people with respect and dignity simply because they are God's
image-bearers. If we say or do something rude to another person, we are actually
saying something negative about someone who God has put his image stamp on.
This is not an acceptable thing to do.
5. How does the image-bearing concept challenge racism?
Racism is the idea that some people are inferior to others. This is in direct
conflict to the Christian message that all human beings are made equal in God's
image. We are called and commanded to treat everyone with equal value.
Note: Encourage students to use the image-bearing concept with individuals
who accuse Christians of being racist. God expects us to treat all his image-
bearers with respect and dignity. Therefore, Bible-believing Christians are usually
not racist, though some individual Christians may be because of personal choice.
Those individuals are not acting in line with God's principles. Christianity as a
whole should not be judged as racist.
Video 6
What's a "Relationship with God"?
1. How can you have a relationship with God today?
Since he has already revealed himself to us in many ways, we can responding to
what God has already done for us. We can get to know him through reading the
Word, praying, seeking wisdom, and being a part of the body of Christ using the
gifts God has given us.
2. The speaker noted that our relationship with God can be seen in
our relationships with other people. Do others see that you have a
relationship with God? How?
CHAPTER 13 | 283
282 | CHAPTER 13


<!-- page-10 (book p.13) -->

CH
Lesson 8:
and
Review P
Have students turn to Activity:
Names of God in their student
manual. Read the directions and
share the information about the
name Jehovah. Allow time for
students to complete the activity.
Note: The names of God in
this activity may be found in
numerous places in the Bible.
The meanings of names may vary
according to the source used. One
example for each name is listed in
the activity.
Then display PS 13.8A Chapter
13 Review to help students
review the concepts in Chapter
13. Allow students to take turns
reading the slides.
Foundatons
NAMES OF GOD
Students will research the meanings of 12 names of God and
consider how they can be included in prayer.
• Materials needed: Bible, computer, and pen
• Time required: 20-30 minutes
1. Divide the class into pairs. Direct students' attention to the 12
names of God listed in their student manual and read them.
2. Inform students that one name for God is Jehovah, a Latinized
form of YHWH, the personal name for God. The name Yahweh
was so sacred to the Jews that it was never said aloud except
by the high priest when he entered into the most holy place
on the great Day of Atonement. Whenever this name occurred
in the sacred books, it was substituted with the name Adonai.
The name Jehovah arose among Christians in the Middle Ages
by combining the consonants YHWH (JHVH) with the vowels
of Adonai, resulting in the pronunciation Yehowah. In the 13th
century, the earliest Latin form of this word was introduced,
which in English became Jehovah.?
3. Guide students to use their computer and Bible to research
what the 12 names of God mean and find one verse where that
name is used in the Bible. Have them write what they find in
the space provided. Allow 15 minutes for research.
4. Read each name of God one at a time and invite student pairs
to share the meaning of the name and a verse where it is used
in the Bible. Read the verse aloud.
5. Discuss how a certain name for God can be used in prayer
when making specific requests. For instance, if someone is
sick or having surgery, they can call upon Jehovah-Rapha.
• Jehovah-Raah: The Lord My Shepherd (Psalm 23:1)
• Jehovah-Tsidkenu: The Lord Our Righteousness
(Jeremiah 23:6)
• Jehovah-Elohim: The Lord Our Eternal Creator (Genesis 2:4)
• Jehovah-Jireh: The Lord Who Provides (Genesis 22:14)
• Jehovah-Rapha: The Lord Who Heals (Exodus 15:26)
• Jehovah-Nissi: The Lord Is My Banner (Exodus 17:15)
• Jehovah-Shalom: The Lord Is Peace (Judges 6:24)
• Jehovah-Shammah: The Lord Is There (Ezekiel 48:35)
• Jehovah-Mekoddishkem: The Lord Who Sanctifies You
(Exodus 31:13)
• Jehovah Sabaoth: The Lord of Hosts (1 Samuel 1:11)
• El Olam: The Everlasting God (Genesis 21:33)
• El Shaddai: God Almighty (Genesis 17:1)
'Heather Adams, "Why Is Jehovah One of God's Names and What Does it Mean?," Crosswalk.
com, www.crosswalk.com/faich/bible-study/why-is-jehovah-one-of-gods-names.html.
2"Yahweh (Lord, Jehovah)," in "The Names of God in the Old Testament," Blue Letter Bibl
https://www.blueletterbible.org/study/misc/name_god.cfm.
FOUNDATIONS 9
284 | CHAPTER 13
Lesson 9:
Study
Guide
Allow students to study for
the Chapter 13 Test. Have
them turn to the Study Guide
in their student manual and
complete the exercises.
Key Terms
perfect being theology
aseity
doctrine of the Trinity
tritheism
modalism
Key Verses
Psalm 90:2
Isaiah 46:9-10
Jeremiah 23:23-24
Matthew 3:16-17
1 John 4:8
1. Describe the four different ways people who believe in God view
who he is.
Some people believe in an authoritative God who is engaged in human
affairs but is judgmental. Some people believe in a benevolent God
who is engaged and nonjudgmental, rescuing or providing alternatives
in crises. Others believe in a critical God who is disengaged and
judgmental, planning to judge us in the afterlife. Still others believe in
a distant God who is disengaged and nonjudgmental.
2. How does perfect being theology relate to God?
Perfect being theology is a view that defines God as the greatest
possible being.
3. Is it possible to know God? Explain how he reveals himself to us.
While it is impossible to know everything about God, we can know
about him in the ways he reveals himself to us—through creation, the
Bible, and through Jesus Christ.
4. How is aseity used to describe God?
Aseity describes God's self-existent and self-sufficient nature. God does
not depend on any other being for his existence. Everything depends
on him.
5. Explain what is meant by this statement: God is spirit and is
incarnate in Jesus.
The Bible tells us that God is not a physical being, rather he is pure
spirit. He is not bound by space or time and no one has ever seen him.
God is incarnate in Jesus means that God himself became a human
being as Jesus Christ, who came to Earth so that we might know God.
6. Some people believe God is a force. Why is that not true?
God is not a force because he is a Person who wants to be known.
The Bible is God's story about the interactions he has with his people.
He has conversations with them, responds with emotions, and has
thoughts and plans for us.
7. Explain what is meant by the following attributes of God:
Eternality: God has always existed. He has no beginning or end.
Omniscience: God knows everything that is possible to know. He
possesses complete knowledge of the past, present, and future.
Omnipotence: God is all-powerful. He has the ability to do anything
he wants to do. Omnipresence: God is always present everywhere.
There is no place where God isn't present. Immutability: God remains
constant and unchangeable. He is the same yesterday, today, and
forever.
CHAPTER 13 | 285


<!-- page-11 (book p.13) -->

CH
Lesson 9:
Study
Guide
(continued)
8. What does it mean for God to be holy?
God is absolutely pure, set apart from everyone and everything. There is no sin
in him.
9. When we say God is wise, what does that mean?
God knows all the implications of his actual and potential actions, bringing
about no unintended consequences. He has understanding and makes good use
of his knowledge.
10. Why is it good that God is righteous?
Being righteous means that God is just. God will always do right. He can't be
bribed, and he can't lie. Because Jesus gave us his righteousness, when God looks
at us, he sees us as righteous and blameless in his sight. This is good news!
11. How is God loving?
God's love is merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and always faithful. God is
love, and it is his nature to love. First Corinthians 13:4-7 tells us what it means
to love.
12. Summarize the doctrine of the Trinity.
The doctrine of the Trinity teaches that God is three Persons in one divine
Being-Father, Son and Holy Spirit. These three Persons of the Trinity are
completely equal in attributes. Each is fully and completely God, yet the Persons
are not identical.
13. How are tritheism and modalism false beliefs? Be specific.
Tritheism is the belief that the Trinity is composed of three separate and
distinct gods. The doctrine of the Trinity specifically states that there is only
one God who exists in three Persons, not three gods. Modalism is the belief
that the Trinity is composed of one God who over time presents himself in
three different modes (Father, Son, and Holy Spirit). This is also false because
Matthew 3:13-17 shows that all three persons—Father, Son, and Holy Spirit-
were present and active at Jesus' baptism.
14. How does the Old Testament confirm that God is three Persons in one,
not three different gods?
The Old Testament speaks of God the Father in Jeremiah 3:19 and in Isaiah
63:16, 64:8. Also Isaiah 7:14 and 9:6 are prophecies about God the Son. The
Holy Spirit is discussed in Genesis 1:1-2; Isaiah 11:2, 61:1; Psalm 51:11; and
Joel 2:28-29.
15. What New Testament verses support the fact that God is Father, Son,
and Holy Spirit?
The three Persons of the Trinity are mentioned together in Matthew 28:19-20,
John 14:26, 2 Corinthians 13:14, Hebrews 9:14, 1 Peter 1:1-2, and Jude
20-21. John 5:17, as well as various other passages, refers to God the Father.
John 1:1 introduces Jesus as the Word, "and the Word was with God, and the Word was
God." Titus 2:13 talks about waiting for the appearing of the glory of our great God and
Savior Jesus Christ. The Holy Spirit is confirmed in 1 Corinthians 2:10-11, 3:16, 6:11, and
Acts 5:3-4.
16. Why is the Trinity important to the Christian faith? Give three reasons.
• God's trinitarian nature means that before creation, the Father was sharing life and love
with the Son and the Holy Spirit. God created us, not because he needed us to be who he
is, but because it is in his nature to share life and love.
• Jesus the Son, who is in perfect harmony with the Father and Spirit, is the only one
through whom we can know God and be saved. God the Father showed his love for
humankind by sending his only Son to Earth so that we can know what God is like and
how we can do God's will through the power of the Spirit. Jesus invites us to receive God's
love through faith and give it out again to others.
• Having both diversity (three distinct Persons) and unity (one God), the Trinity provides
the model for Christian community, which should also be characterized by unity
and diversity. The members of our Christian community come from many different
backgrounds. Even though each member has specific characteristics and gifts, all receive
the same Spirit and are part of the same body. The gospel does not demand that we ignore
our differences, but it does call us all to unity. As we love one another and strive for peace
and reconciliation, we reflect the harmonious relationship of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.
17. Is the goal of theology merely to learn more or think more accurately about God?
Explain.
While these things are good, we actually want to know God personally rather than just have
book knowledge. We want to love him with all our mind and heart. As we grow in our love
for God, we will also grow in our desire to know his thoughts and values. Good theology is
an act of worship.
18. Read and study the five Key Verses listed at the top of the study guide.
CHAPTER 13 | 287
5 Who God Is
286 | CHAPTER 13


<!-- page-12 (book p.13) -->

CH
13 Test P
Distribute TR 13.10A Chapter 13 Test to each student and
allow time for them to complete the exercises. Students who
finish early may start reading Chapter 14. Assign homework.
Notes
Who God Wants
Us to Be
288 | CHAPTER 13
