# Chapter 17

<!-- page-1 (book p.16) -->

CH
16 Test P
Distribute TR 16.10A Chapter 16 Test to each student and
allow time for them to complete the exercises. Students who
finish early may start reading Chapter 17. Assign homework.
Notes
Loving God and
Others
352 | CHAPTER 16
FOUNDATIONS G


<!-- page-2 -->

Loving God and
Others
Chapter 17 Syllabus
Lesson
REVIEW
WATCH
REVIEW FOR
STUDY FOR
GIVE
Assignment
Chapter 16 Test
Questions for Chapter 17.1-17.2
Activity: Hunting for Love
Chapter 17.3-17.4
Questions for Chapter 17.3-17.4
Questions for Chapter 17.3-17.4
Activity: Six Views on Love
Chapter 17.5-17.6
Questions for Chapter 17.5-17.6
Questions for Chapter 17.5-17.6
Activity: Ditch the Clique
Chapter 17.7-17.8
Questions for Chapter 17.7-17.8
Questions for Chapter 17.7-17.8
Activity: Good Samaritans
Chapter 17.9-17.10
Questions for Chapter 17.9-17.10
Questions for Chapter 17.9-17.10
Activity: Overcoming Evil with Good
Activity: Live, Love, Collage
Videos
Video Questions
Video Questions
Activity: Handy Answers
Study Guide Questions
Chapter 18.1-18.2
Questions for Chapter 18.1-18.2
*Student Textbook (ST) Student Manual (SM)
A full-year syllabus is available in the online resources.
354 | CHAPTER 17
Page
356-357
ST 234-236
SM 334
ST 236-239
SM 336
ST 239-241
SM 338
ST 241-244
SM 340-341
SM 343-344
367-368
SM 347-349
370-371
ST 245-248
SM 352
Chapter 17
OVERVIEW
The two greatest commandments are to
love the Lord will all your heart and mind
and to love your neighbor as yourself. All
of God's moral laws hinge on these two
commandments. When we place our faith in
Christ, the Holy Spirit gives us new hearts so
we can demonstrate love for God and God's
love for others to the world.
C. S. Lewis identified four words for
love in the Greek language: eros, philia,
storge, and agape. Agape is selfless, self-giving
love and is frequently mentioned in the
New Testament. All other loves need agape
to keep them from becoming warped. Love
involves action and commitment. It is in
God's nature to love us, but it is not in our
corrupted nature to love him. That's why
we need a new nature. Jesus gives us a new
nature and provides the ultimate example
for how to love others. As we love God and
receive his love for us, we are then able to
love others.
Leviticus 19, the parable of the Good
Samaritan, and the Sermon on the Mount
teach us who our neighbors are and how
to love them. We love our neighbors
individually and by bringing shalom to
our communities through the family, the
church, the government, and intermediary
institutions such as schools and hospitals.
This includes promoting what is good
and opposing what is evil. Christians
are dual citizens in God's kingdom and
earthly nations. As citizens of heaven, our
responsibilities include living peaceably with
others, respecting our authorities, and giving
ultimate allegiance to God alone. Loving
our neighbors includes loving our enemies.
Five practical steps for loving enemies
include: start by looking at yourself, look for
the good in others, choose love rather than
hate, guard your heart, and persevere.
9 Loving God and Others
PREPARATION
Lesson 1:
For the Lesson 6 activity, students will
bring in a poster board, scissors, and
magazines, newspapers, photos, or
images printed off the computer.
Make a copy of TR 17.2A Six Views on
Love for each student. Make a copy of
the answer key for yourself.
Lesson 4:
Cut TR 17.4A Three Scenarios into
three strips. Computers will be needed.
Lesson 5:
Make one copy of TR 17.5A
Overcoming Evil with Good
Answers.
Lesson 6:
Provide glue sticks or tape. Each
student needs poster board, scissors,
and magazines, newspapers, photos,
or images printed off the computer.
Access and preview the five videos
listed on Lesson 7. See the inside back
cover of this manual for instructions to
stream videos.
Lesson 8:
Review PS 17.8A Handy Answers to
become familiar with the activity. Make
one copy of TR 17.8A Handy Answers
Score Sheet. Cut out the score sheets
and keep them together with a paper
clip. Cut five red and five blue sheets of
construction paper into quarters. Place
each color into a separate bag.
Print a copy of TR 17.10A Chapter 17
Test for each student.
LESSON MATERIALS
Presentation Slides
PS 17.8A Handy Answers
PS 17.8B Chapter 17 Review
Teacher Resources
TR 17.2A Six Views on Love
TR 17.4A Three Scenarios
TR 17.5A Overcoming Evil with Good Answers
TR 17.8A Handy Answers Score Sheet
TR 17.10A Chapter 17 Test
CHAPTER 17 | 355


<!-- page-3 (book p.17) -->

CH
Lesson 1:
17.1-17.2 P
Review Chapter 16 Test. Have
students turn to page 231 in
their student textbook. Read the
objectives to the class. Go over
the answers to the Discussion
Questions for Chapter 17.1-
17.2 on page 332 in the student
manual. Have students turn to
Activity: Hunting for Love.
Have students work in groups.
Read the directions. Assign the
homework. Inform students
they will need to bring in a
poster board and magazines,
newspapers, photos, or images
printed off the computer for the
Lesson 6 activity. The activity
will include answering the four
questions from Chapter 17.4
or Chapter 17.7 in the student
textbook. Students may plan
ahead by reading the questions
and choosing pictures that
represent their answers.
discuss the importance of
keeping the two greatest
commandments. [17.1]
distinguish between four
types of love. [17.2]
356 | CHAPTER 17
1. What did Jesus mean when he said that all the Law and the
Prophets depend on the commandments to love God and
neighbor? [17.1]
Possible answer: The Old Testament contains hundreds of laws
ranging from what people could eat to how they should treat one
another in certain situations. All of these laws were based on God's
character. The principle behind every law was "love God and love
your neighbor." In other words, live in obedience and reverence
toward God and treat your neighbor as God would have you treat
them. The commandments to love God and your neighbor are both
the foundation of the law and the summing up of the law. The
command to love your neighbor is built on the command to love
God first.
2. Why haven't humans ever been able to create the near-perfect
society described in this chapter? [17.1]
Because we all sin, we all inevitably fail to love God and our
neighbors as we ought. We all violate God's moral standards, so we
all contribute to the world's problems. Because we are corrupted by
original sin, we can't simply try harder. We need God to save us and
transform our hearts so that we can love him and give out his love to
others freely. Even then, the work of transformation is gradual, not
immediate. So, we still experience the cycle of spiritual growth in
which we sin, repent, confess, and cooperate with the Holy Spirit's
work to change our hearts and behavior to conform to the character
of Christ. Ultimately, eradicating sin and bringing about the ideal
world is God's responsibility. As our hearts are remade, we become
participants in fulfilling God's will on earth until he restores all
things.
3. Describe four Greek words for love. [17.2]
• agape: selfless, sacrificial love—the kind of love that God shows us
• eros: romantic love and sexual desire—the kind of longing we feel
for another human being
• philia: love between friends, family, or community—a kind of
companionship or comradeship
• storge: natural affection-
the kind of affection that wells up in us
for people and things in our lives out of familiarity with them
4. Is love a feeling or an action? Explain. [17.2]
Love involves feelings, although it cannot be reduced to a feeling.
Storge, philia, or eros might produce strong emotional reactions in us
at times. Yet love also involves action and intentionality, It is not just
something we feel toward others but something we give. The highest
form of love in the New Testament is agape, which is a totally
selfless love. We may not necessarily feel any love emotionally for a
particular person, but agape love works regardless of our feelings, motivating us to give of
ourselves for others. It involves intentionally and sacrificially caring for the other person,
regardless of whether that love is deserved. In Scripture, God expresses feelings of tender
love for us but also demonstrates that love. He has consistently taken action on agape
love by giving his very life for us through Jesus and caring for us day by day, even though
we don't deserve it.
HUNTING FOR LOVE
Students will analyze
1. Divide the class into four groups. Direct each group to
Bible passages to
search in their Bibles for verses or Bible stories that
determine which
serve as an example of each of these types of love:
type of love is being
agape, eros, phileo, and storge.
demonstrated.
2. Once a team has found four verses or stories, review
their answers to confirm they correctly portray the
• Materials needed: Bible,
paper, and pen
20-25 minutes
specific love. If all four answers are correct, declare
that team the winner. If the first team to finish doesn't
have a correct match, review the second team's
answers. Continue until a team correctly matches all
four.
3. Review each team's answers if you haven't done
so already. Then have students share their teams
approved verses or stories with the class.
Examples of correct matches:
• agape: Esther risks her life for her people (Esther
1-10), Jesus as the Good Shepherd (John 10:14-
18), the "love chapter" (1 Corinthians 13:1-13)
• eros: Isaac and Rebekah (Genesis 24:62-67), Jacob
and Rachel (Genesis 29:16-20), Samson and Delilah
(Judges 16:1-6)
• phileo: David and Jonathan (1 Samuel 20:12-17),
Ruth and Naomi (Ruth 1-4), Paul and Timothy (2
Timothy 1:1-7)
• storge: Moses' mother hides him from Pharaoh
(Exodus 1:22-2:4), Moses and Aaron (Exodus
4:27-30), Abram and Lot (Genesis 13:3-12)
CHAPTER 17 | 357


<!-- page-4 (book p.17) -->

CH
Lesson 2:
17.3-17.4
Read the objectives to the
class. Go over the answers to
the Discussion Questions for
Chapter 17.3-17.4. Have
students turn to Activity: Six
Views on Love in their student
manual. Distribute one copy of
TR 17.2A Six Views on Love
to each student. Keep a copy of
the answer key for yourself. Have
students read and complete the
exercises. Assign the homework.
O Students will be able to
explain how to love God.
[17.3]
• Students will be able to relate
receiving God's love to the
ability to love others. [17.4]
TRIZA Six Views on Love
258 CHAPTER 17
1. What does it mean to love God? [17.3]
Loving God is about being in relationship with him, seeking to
spend time with him, and enjoying his presence. We may not always
feel love for God, but our love for God is about more than feelings.
It is also about how we love our neighbors, are obedient to God's
commands, and keep him at the center of our lives by rejecting
idolatry.
2. What is idolatry and how is it commonly practiced today?
[17.3]
Idolatry is the sin of worshipping anyone or anything other than
God. An idol may be a good thing that we mistakenly value above
God, or it may be a bad thing that we have become addicted to.
People make idols out of money, power, status, sex, fame, drugs, and
more. When these things become our gods, we inevitably end up
becoming like them—shallow, unstable, unthinking, and uncaring.
3. What does it mean to receive God's love for yourself? [17.4]
To receive God's love for ourselves is to accept his offer of salvation
and claim our identity as God's beloved children. It is to see
ourselves as God sees us. This means that we acknowledge our
sinfulness but are not defined by it. Instead, we rest in God's great
love for us.
4. How are your current habits—your loves, loyalties, longings,
and liturgies—shaping you? [17.4]
Answers will vary.
SIX VIEWS ON LOVE
Students will contrast the
1. Distribute one copy of TR 17.2A Six Views on Love to
biblical view of love with
each student. Direct students to read the instructions
those of other worldviews.
and complete the activity.
2. Use the answer key while students discuss their
answers with the class.
• Materials needed:
TR 17.2A, Bible, and pen
25-30 minutes
CHAPICK 1/I
FOUNDATIONS 5


<!-- page-5 (book p.1) -->

CH
Lesson 3:
17.5-17.6
Read the objectives to the
class. Go over the answers
to the Discussion Questions
for Chapter 17.5-17.6. Have
students turn to Activity:
Ditch the Clique in their
student manual. Read the
directions. Assign the
homework.
give examples of ways Jesus
demonstrated love. [17.5]
summarize what loving your
neighbor means. [17.6]
360 | CHAPTER 17
1. What are three ways Jesus demonstrated agape love to others?
List some specific examples. [17.5]
Answers should include: Jesus spent time with others, listened,
served, grieved over human sinfulness and suffering, told the truth,
honored women and children, advocated for the poor, treated
outsiders with kindness and respect, gave his life for us, forgave his
enemies, empowered others, and prayed for others.
2. According to Leviticus 19:13-18, what responsibilities did the
Israelites have toward one other? [17.6]
God instructed the Israelites to treat their neighbors in the following
ways:
• Don't oppress or rob your neighbor.
• Pay hired workers what you owe them when you owe them.
• Honor the deaf and the blind.
• Do justice in court and don't show favoritism to the rich or poor.
• Don't slander or stand by while your neighbor is in harm's way.
• Don't hate. Instead, rebuke without humiliating.
• Don't take vengeance or hold grudges.
3. How could these standards be applied today toward loving our
neighbor? [17.6]
Possible answer: We can treat others kindly and justly by not showing
favoritism, gossiping, holding grudges, or stealing. We shouldn't
cheat people out of what is theirs or hate them. If someone does
something wrong, we should talk to them about it and correct
them without shaming them publicly or treating them badly. When
something bad happens, it can be easy to stand aside and think
someone else will take care of it. Instead, we can step in and do
what's right to protect others instead of just looking out for ourselves.
4. What is the point of the parable of the Good Samaritan? [17.6]
The point of the parable is to answer the question, "Who is my
neighbor?" According to Jesus, my neighbor is anyone who needs
mercy and compassion, even if that person is my enemy. Being a
good neighbor involves sacrificial action on behalf of another.
5. Think about a person or a group of people that you are
suspicious of, uncomfortable with, or dislike. How might
seeing them as your neighbors change the way you think or
talk about them? How might it change the way you treat them?
[17.6]
Possible answer: If I saw those people the way Jesus sees them and
considered my responsibilities toward them as my neighbors, I would
not think of them as enemies, inconveniences, or threats. I would see
them as people who share a common humanity, I would not speak
derogatorily about them, ignore them, or shun them. I would look
for ways to serve them and speak the truth with love.
FOUNDATIONS
DITCH THE CLIQUE
Students will demonstrate the effect of
• Materials needed: none
cliques and prejudices on people and
• Time required: 15-20 minutes
community.
1. Divide class into three groups. Each group will perform a different demonstration.
Choose one student from each group to operate as an "outsider" and give the remaining
students in each group the role of "insiders." Explain that human beings tend to have
prejudices and form cliques. People tend to sort others into categories of those whom
they like and trust or those whom they dislike and distrust.
2. For the first demonstration, direct the insiders in Group 1 to stand shoulder-to-shoulder
in a tight circle so that it would be difficult to squeeze between them. Have the outsider
attempt to join the group (without too much force), and direct insiders to resist the
outsider's efforts. With the class, briefly discuss the difficulty the outsider faced trying to
join a group that was unfriendly and resistant.
3. For the second demonstration, direct the insiders in Group 2 to form a loose circle. They
should move away when the outsider approaches, but eventually allow the outsider to
join the circle. Briefly discuss the fact that while groups were less resistant this time, one
welcoming person makes joining a group easier.
4. For the final demonstration, have the insiders in Group 3 form a single-file line at one
end of the classroom. Have the outsider stand at the opposite side of the room. Direct
the insiders to stay in line as they move throughout the room and invite seated students
to line up with their group as they go. When the insiders reach the outsider's side of the
room, have them invite the outsider to join the line. Once this has been done, announce
that the insiders' mission is accomplished.
5. With the class, discuss the differences between the three versions of the exercise and
relate them to how people behave socially. Discuss the following questions:
•How might prejudices and cliques prevent Christians from reaching out to others
(both Christian and non-Christian)?
• How might this behavior hurt the local church?
• How can Christians intentionally avoid or overcome a clique mentality and invite
"outsiders" into community in the local church?
CHAPTER 17 | 361
© Loving God and Others


<!-- page-6 (book p.17) -->

CH
Lesson 4:
17.7-17.8 ₽
Read the objectives to the class. Go
over the answers to the Discussion
Questions for Chapter 17.7-17.8.
Have students turn to Activity:
Good Samaritans in their student
manual. Have a copy of TR 17.4A
Three Scenarios cut into three
strips and ready to distribute.
Read the directions. Assign the
homework.
express how Christians can
contribute to building healthy
communities. [17.7]
• Students will be able to explain
the concept of Christian
dual citizenship and our
responsibilities as citizens of
God's kingdom. [17.8]
362 | CHAPTER 17
1. Is it permissible for Christians to work together with non-
Christians for the good of the community? Why or why not?
[17.7]
Possible answer: While Christians should not compromise their
convictions or hide their beliefs to get along with others, they can
cooperate with non-Christians on projects designed for the good
of the community. Doing so demonstrates God's love, exemplifies
a peaceful spirit, and makes it clear that God cares about the here
and now. Working with others for the good of all shows that God's
love extends to the whole world, not just those in the Christian
community.
2. What does it mean that Christians have dual citizenship?
[17.8]
Christians are citizens of God's kingdom and citizens of the
particular earthly nations in which they happen to live. God has the
first claim on our allegiance and is the primary one to whom we owe
obedience. Allegiance to Jesus should lead us to be good citizens in
our home nations, to work within God's standards for our nation's
good, and to call our leaders to account when they practice evil.
3. What are some responsibilities included in Christian dual
citizenship? [17.8]
All Christians are to live peaceably with others as much as possible,
obey the laws, pay taxes, and respect and pray for those in authority.
They are also to peaceably resist government laws or ideologies that
directly contradict God's commands. All Christians should seek
justice for everyone and promote the welfare of the nation in which
they live. Some Christians may be called to actively participate in
local or national government by running for a political office or
campaigning for certain legislation.
4. Nations have too often decided (in principle or in law) that
a certain group or class of people is not to be considered
valuable or fully human. How should Christians respond in
these situations? [17.8]
Possible answer: Christians are first and foremost citizens of God's
kingdom, and in God's kingdom all people bear God's image. This
means that all people have an inherent dignity and value that no
person or government can take away. Christians must actively resist
any dehumanization of any group of people. How exactly to resist
and what actions to take in response is not always agreed upon,
though Christians must not return evil for evil. They are to follow
the example of Jesus, who demonstrated love and forgiveness and
who conquered evil by giving up his life for the sake of others.
GOOD SAMARITANS
Students will discuss how
1. Divide the class into three groups. Distribute
Christians can respond
a scenario from TR 17.4A Three Scenarios to
ethically to difficult
each group. Have each group use a computer to
situations.
research the concept related to their assigned
scenario:
• Materials needed:
TR 17.4A, Bible and
computer
25-30 minutes
• Scenario 1: Good Samaritan laws
• Scenario 2: The bystander effect
• Scenario 3: The consequences of sharing the
gospel in a Communist country
2. Have each group read their assigned scenario
and then read the following four passages: Mark
12:17; Acts 5:25-29; and James 1:5, 4:17. Direct
groups to analyze how Christian principles could
apply to their scenario.
3. Have each group present their conclusions to
the class.
CHAPTER 17 | 363


<!-- page-7 (book p.17) -->

CH
Lesson 5:
Chapter P
17.9-17.10
Read the objective to the class.
Go over the answers to the
Discussion Questions for Chapter
17.9-17.10. Have students turn
to Activity: Overcoming Evil
with Good in their student
manual. Have students work
in groups. Have a copy of TR
17.5A Ocercoming Evil with
Good Answers available. Read
the directions. Direct students
to complete the exercise. For
the Lesson 6 activity, remind
students to bring in a poster
board, scissors, and magazines,
newspapers, photos, or images
printed off the computer that
will represent the answers to the
questions they chose from either
Chapter 17.4 or 17.7.
OBJECTIVE
• Students will be able to apply
five principles for loving
enemies. [17.9]
364 | CHAPTER 17
1. What are five principles for loving your enemies? [17.9]
• Start by looking at yourself.
• Look for the good in others.
• Choose love rather than hate.
• Guard your heart.
• Persevere.
2. How could you put each principle into practice? [17.9]
Answers will vary.
3. Why is Jesus' command to love and forgive our enemies
difficult to follow? [17.9]
Possible answer: One reason could be that we forget how much God
has forgiven us. When we see the other person's sin against us as
bigger than our own sins against God, we can become prideful and
think of ourselves as morally superior to the person who wronged
us. Another reason could be that we confuse forgiveness with not
being allowed to grieve or deal with the pain we experienced from
the wrong against us. Forgiveness doesn't mean feeling happy or
not caring about what happened. Forgiveness means refusing to
hold onto anger and the desire for revenge. It means that we give
the responsibility for ultimate justice to God and to appropriate
authorities. One reason might also be that we think if we forgive that
it will let people "off the hook" for wrongs they have committed.
When we forgive, we do let people off the hook in our hearts, but
we leave them "on the hook" with a higher authority: God. Also,
since God instituted governments to do justice, we also turn over the
right to legal justice to the courts, rather than to vigilante efforts or
false "justice" we seek through embittering our hearts.
4. Based on what you have learned in this and previous chapters,
what are some defining characterics of a Christian? [17.10]
Possible answers: One major defining mark of a Christian is love for
God and neighbors. Others include generosity, the fruit of the Spirit,
trust in Jesus for redemption, belief in the death and resurrection
of Jesus, submitting to Jesus as Lord, hope in the return of Christ,
submitting to the authority of the Bible, practicing faith with
community, and obeying the commands of Jesus.
5. How can we cultivate lives characterized by agape love?
[17.10]
We can live in a way that is characterized by agape love by being
transformed by the Holy Spirit. We can also do this by remembering
love is central to our faith and our greatest joy. We also look to Jesus'
example and imitate him as we learn to love in both word and deed.
OVERCOMING EVIL WITH GOOD
Students will evaluate
1. Divide the class into four groups. Assign each group
how biblical characters
one of the following topics:
responded to their enemies.
• David and Saul (1 Samuel 18:5-11, 23:14,
• Materials needed: Bible
and pen
20-25 minutes
24:2-10)
• Joseph and his brothers (Genesis 37:2, 17-28;
42:6-8, 23; 44:1-14, 18, 30-33, 45:1-8, 50:15-21)
• Rahab and the spies (Joshua 2:1-16, 6:16-25)
• Sarah and Hagar (Genesis 15:1-6, 16:1-16,
17:15-21, 21:1-13, 17-18)
2. Direct groups to evaluate the passages and write
the answers to the questions in their student
manual. Use TR 17.5A Overcoming Evil with Good
Answers to guide you in assisting students.
3. Have each group present their answers to the class.
CHAPTER 17 | 365


<!-- page-8 (book p.17) -->

CH
Lesson 6:
Have students read both sets of
four questions on pages 224 and
228 in their student textbook.
Direct students to choose one of
the sets of questions as the topic
for their collage.
OBJECTIVE
• Students will illustrate
answers to questions about
either the life habits that help
Christians flourish or how to
build strong communities.
PREPARATION
• Materials needed: poster
board, scissors, glue sticks
or transparent tape, and
magazines, newspapers,
photos, or images printed
from the computer
© Time required:
45-50 minutes
366 CHAPTER 17
LIVE, LOVE, COLLAGE
1. Direct students to have all their materials ready.
Distribute a glue stick or transparent tape to each
student. Have students turn to the questions they
chose from Chapter 17.4 or 17.7.
2. Explain that students are to think about their answers
and cut out pictures or use other images they may
have brought in to represent their answers. Have
students write their four questions on their poster
board and arrange pictures around the corresponding
question, then glue or tape the pictures onto the
poster board.
3. Have students present their poster board and explain
their answers to the class.
Videos P
In this lesson, students will view
five interviews of various Christian
educators and authors. Each expert
answers a specific worldview or
apologetics question. These videos
will allow students to expand their
knowledge and provide biblical
answers to thought-provoking
questions. The following videos
will be used in today's lesson:
1. Does God Command Love?
(Sherrard, 2:51)
2. What Does It Mean to Steward
Our Role as Citizens? (Marshall,
1:12)
3. Why Is It Important for
Christians to Think about
Politics? (McDowell, 1:46)
4. The Danger of Christian Clichés
(Koukl, 5:15)
5. What's Wrong with Loving the
Sinner, Hating the Sin? (Yuan,
2:57)
Play the videos one at a time in
the order listed above. Before each
video, direct students to read the
questions associated with that
video in their student manual
so they know what to listen for.
During and after the video has
been shown, students should write
their answers to the Discussion
Questions. It may be necessary to
play the video again so students
can answer all the questions.
Go over the questions for the
first video. Play the next video.
Continue in this manner until
the last video has been played and
questions have been discussed.
5 Loving God and Others
• Video 1:
Does God Command Love?
1. How can the whole law be summarized?
The whole law can be summed up by saying love God and love your
neighbor.
2. What are the two sides of love?
The two sides of love are affection and seeking the good of somebody
else even at your own expense.
3. Should we love even if we don't want to?
Yes, loving and obeying righteous laws and commands are good
things even if we don't want to do them.
4. What can the practice and discipline of love lead to?
It can lead to your feelings changing.
• Video 2:
What Does It Mean to Steward Our Role as Citizens?
1. Who is called to steward their role as citizens?
Everyone is called to steward their role as citizens.
2. What roles contribute to the flourishing of individuals?
These roles include government, family, church, business, and other
associations.
3. How should we express our perspectives?
It's best to express our perspectives in a way that invites others to
reason with us and engage in instructive debate.
Video 3
Why Is It Important for Christians to Think about Politics?
1. Why is it important to think about politics?
It's important because God is sovereign over everything.
2. What are the practical implications of politics?
Politics impacts freedom of speech, freedom of worship, and
working according to your principles.
CHAPTER 17 | 367


<!-- page-9 (book p.17) -->

CH
Videos
(continued)
CHAPTER 17
3. What three types of Christian principles help us think clearly about
politics and love our neighbors?
The three types are principles that show the dignity of humankind, principles
that show our responsibility to one another, and principles that accurately assess
human nature.
Video 4
The Danger of Christian Clichés
1. What is a pastorism?
A pastorism is a slogan that has some value, but if you aren't careful with how
you use the slogan, it will communicate something that isn't true.
2. What is the correct understanding of "God turned his back on Jesus"?
God poured his wrath on Jesus in our place.
3. What is a potential problem with "God turned his back on Jesus"?
Some people misunderstand to think there is a split in the Trinity.
4. What balance does the phrase "love the sinner, hate the sin" need?
It needs to emphasize the love of God without minimizing the justice of God.
5. How is the phrase "people don't care how much you know until they
know how much you care" sometimes misused?
It's often used to dismiss helpful apologetics or to avoid learning things that
could help us communicate effectively with others.
•
Video 5
What's Wrong with Loving the Sinner, Hating the Sin?
1. How do unbelievers feel when they hear, "I love you, but I hate your sin"?
They don't feel loved.
2. What worldview issue makes this common saying hurtful to unbelievers?
Unbelievers often aren't able to separate their sin from their identity as a person.
3. What is the alternative to saying, "love the sinner, hate the sin"?
Don't say "love the sinner, hate the sin." Just live that way.
Lesson 8:
and
Review P
Have students turn to Activity:
Handy Answers in their student
manual. Have the score sheets
from TR 17.8A Handy Answers
Score Sheet cut out and available.
Display PS 17.8A Handy
Answers. Have students work in
groups. Then display PS 17.8B
Chapter 17 Review to help
students review the concepts in
Chapter 17. Allow students to
take turns reading the slides.
RITA Handy Answers Score Sheet
cam 1 Score Shen
BA Handy Answer!
Foundations
Loving God and Others
GLoving God and Others
HANDY ANSWERS
Students will identify the correct definition or
description for key concepts.
• Materials needed: PS 17.8A, TR 17.8A, scissors, blue
and red construction paper, and timer
• Time required: 25-30 minutes
1. Divide the class into four teams. Give each
student one red and one blue square cut from the
construction paper. Display the first slide of PS 17.8A
Handy Answers and read the directions to the class.
2. Distribute a score sheet from TR 17.8A Handy
Answers Score Sheet to each team. The person
selected as the score keeper for their team will
record their team's score for each question on the
score sheet. Space for each question's score is
provided under its designator, which consists of a
Q and the corresponding question number from PS
17.8A. (For example, Question 3 is designated as Q3
on the score sheet.) For each question, the score
keeper will record one point for each team member
who answers the question correctly. At the end of
each round, the score keeper will add up the team's
totals from the round.
3. Display slide 2, then slide 3 and read the first
question. Give students 20 seconds to decide on
and indicate their answers by raising their colored
paper(s). Display the answer and have the score
keeper record their team's score.
4. Complete the questions in the slide presentation
or end the exercise when five minutes remain,
whichever occurs first. Have teams say their scores
for each round. The teams) with the highest number
of points for that round may add one bonus point.
Direct teams to add up their total score and bonus
points to determine their final scores. Have teams
turn in their score sheets. Check their final scores for
accuracy. The team with the highest final score wins.
Announce the winning team.
CHAPTER 17 | 369


<!-- page-10 (book p.17) -->

CH
Lesson 9:
Study
Guide
Allow students to study for the
Chapter 17 Test. Have them
turn to the Study Guide in their
student manual and complete the
exercises.
Key Terms
philia
storge
eros
agape
Key Verses
Psalm 135:15-18
Matthew 5:43-45
Leviticus 19:13-18
Romans 13:8-10
John 15:12
370 | CHAPTER 17
1. What is the importance of keeping the two greatest
commandments?
All of God's moral laws and commands are based on the commands to
love God and love our neighbors.
2. What are the four types of love discussed in this chapter?
Describe each one.
Agape is selfless love. Eros is romantic love and sexual desire. Philia is
love of family, friends, and community. Storge is natural affection.
3. In what ways can we love God?
We love God by seeking and enjoying him, obeying his commands, and
loving other people. We avoid idolatry and prioritize him over all else.
4. How is receiving God's love related to the ability to love others?
We love others because God first loved us. He demonstrated his love
toward us so that we could be redeemed from sin and its consequences
and transformed. This transformation makes it possible for us to love
others with agape love.
5. Give examples of how Jesus demonstrated love.
Jesus demonstrated love by spending time with others, listening,
serving others, grieving over human sinfulness and suffering, telling the
truth, honoring women and children, advocating for the poor, treating
outsiders with kindness and respect, giving his life for us, forgiving his
enemies, empowering others, and praying for others.
6. What does it mean to love your neighbor?
Loving your neighbors means seeking their good and caring for them
as we would for ourselves. It means not treating our neighbors unjustly.
7. How can Christians contribute to building healthy communities?
Christians can build healthy communities by recognizing our common
membership in the human family. We also seek the well-being of the
community God has placed us in and of the people within it, including
non-Christians. Christians are to bring shalom to their communities.
8. Explain the concept of Christian dual citizenship and our
responsibilities as citizens of God's kingdom.
We are first and foremost citizens of God's kingdom. We are still citizens
of earthly kingdoms, though. So, we still pay taxes, pray for and respect
local authorities, and obey the law. We recognize our ultimate allegiance
is due to God. We seek justice and may get involved in local or national
government. If our governments or leaders command us to do evil or
stop us from doing what is right before God, we must obey God first.
9. Describe five principles for loving your enemies.
Start by looking at yourself. We all sin. Sometimes others' dislike of us is
completely unfounded, but sometimes it may be because we have sinned against
them in some way. Look for the good in others. Even the worst of sinners is made
in the image of God. Choose love rather than hate. Hate perpetuates the cycle of
sin. Only agape love can break that. Guard your heart. Don't let yourself become
bitter. Persevere. Loving enemies is hard work, but don't give up.
10. What does the Good Samaritan teach us about loving our neighbors?
The Good Samaritan teaches us that our neighbors include our enemies. This
parable also teaches us to go out of our way to care for others.
11. What four questions can we ask about building strong communities?
What's good we can protect, promote, and celebrate? What's broken we can fix or
restore? What's evil we can stop? What's missing we can contribute?
12. What four questions can we ask to help connect our love for God with
our life habits?
What are my loves, loyalties, longings, liturgies?
13. According to Luther, what three principal institutions did God ordain?
God ordained family, church, and government.
14. What is another term for institutions that supplement family, church, and
government?
They are also called intermediary institutions, which include schools, hospitals, and
community service organizations.
15. What does the term basar mean and why is it significant?
Basar means flesh and also implies the idea of clan. It shows that Adam and Eve
created one human family to which we all belong.
16. What is the primary defining mark of a Christian?
The primary defining mark is love for God and others.
17. Why can't human beings transform society into something perfect?
Humans all contribute to the brokenness of the world. We also need transformed
hearts through faith in Christ.
18. What is the biblical view of loving ourselves?
The Bible assumes that we tend to love ourselves. The Bible teaches that we are
sinful, but also that we are made in the image of God and that we, as Christians,
identify as children of God, so we do have worth. We should not think of
ourselves more highly than we ought.
19. Read and study the Key Verses listed at the beginning of the study guide.
© Loving God and Others
CHAPTER 17 | 371


<!-- page-11 (book p.17) -->

CH
17 Test P
Distribute TR 17.10A Chapter 17 Test to each student and
allow time for them to complete the exercises. Students who
finish early may start reading Chapter 18. Assign homework.
Notes
Conclusion
Jesus
372 | CHAPTER 17
FOUNDATIONS g
