# Chapter 3

<!-- page-1 (book p.2) -->

CH
Chapter 2
Test P
Distribute TR 2.8 Chapter 2 Test to each student and allow time
for them to complete the exercises. Students who finish early may
start reading Chapter 3. Assign the homework.
Notes
38 | CHAPTER 2


<!-- page-2 -->

Chapter 3 Syllabus
Lesson
REVIEW
WATCH
REVIEW FOR
GIVE
Additional/alternate content
ENRICHMENT
STUDY
Assignment
Chapter 2 Test
Questions for Chapter 3.1-3.2
Activity: Powerful Parables
Chapter 3.3-3.4
Questions for Chapter 3.3-3.4
Questions for Chapter 3.3-3.4
Activity: The Truth about Sin
Chapter 3.5-3.6
Questions for Chapter 3.5-3.6
Questions for Chapter 3.5-3.6
Activity: Types of Christ Bible Study
Chapter 3.7-3.8
Questions for Chapter 3.7-3.8
Questions for Chapter 3.7-3.8
Activity: Beautiful Atonement
Chapter 3.9-3.10
Questions for Chapter 3.9-3.10
Questions for Chapter 3.9-3.10
Activity: Six Views on Purpose Bible Study
Videos
Video Questions
Video Questions
Activity: The Better Story
Chapter 4.1-4.2
Questions for Chapter 4.1-4.2
Activity: Double Guess Game
Study Guide Questions
Student Textbook (ST) Student Manual (SM)
40 | CHAPTER 3
Page
ST 41-44
SM 48
ST44-47
SM 50
46-47
47-48
ST 47-49
SM 52
49-50
50-51
ST 50-53
SM 54
SM 58-59
54-55
56-57
ST 54-57
SM 64
TR 3.A
TR 3.SG
Chapter 3
OVERVIEW
Human beings are storytelling creatures.
Stories illuminating the human condition
and mimicking the true story of reality in
the Bible resonate with us the most. Stories
suggest meaning and purpose, and they
help us make sense of our lives. The biblica
metanarrative connects our individual
stories to God's big story of Creation, the
Fall, Redemption Initiated, the Interlude,
Redemption Accomplished, Restoration
Initiated, and Restoration Accomplished.
This is the true global story, not Western
mythology.
Here is God's grand story summarized:
Human beings were created in God's image
to rule and be in a relationship with God,
self, others, and nature. The first humans
rebelled against God and broke his moral
laws. This action separated them and their
descendants from God and gave all people a
sin nature. Suffering, evil, chaos, and death
resulted from that rebellion. Without God's
intervention, that separation would last
into eternity. But God never gives up on
his creation, so he called Abraham and his
descendants to form a nation that would
point people to God and through which the
Savior would come. After much waiting and
anticipation in Israel, God became flesh as
Jesus Christ. He taught about the kingdom
of God and performed miracles proving who
he is. He lived the perfect life that humans
could not and died in our place to pay the
penalty for our rebellion. Jesus rose again,
defeating sin, death, and the powers of evil.
By trusting in him, we are restored to a right
relationship with God, ourselves, others, and
nature. Jesus established the church to bring
the gospel to the world and promised that
one day he will return to restore all things.
This is the enduring hope of the church.
5 The Shape of God's Story
PREPARATION P
Lesson 2:
Preview PS 3.2 The Truth about
Sin to become familiar with the
activity.
Lesson 4:
Make four copies of TR 3.4
Beautiful Atonement. Make one
copy of the Answer Key.
Lesson 5:
Make one copy of TR 3.5 Six Views
on Purpose Answers for yourself.
Lesson 6:
Access and preview the four videos
listed on Lesson 6. See the inside
back cover of this manual for
instructions to stream videos.
Lesson 7:
Preview PS 3.7 The Better Story
to become familiar with the
activity. Locate rulers for this
activity.
Make one copy of TR 3.8 Chapter 3
Test for each student.
LESSON MATERIALS
Presentation Slides
PS 3.2 The Truth about Sin
PS 3.7 The Better Story
PS 3.7 Chapter 3 Review
Teacher Resources
TR 3.3 Types of Christ Bible Study Answer Key*
TR 3.4 Beautiful Atonement
TR 3.5 Six Views on Purpose Answers
TR 3.SG Chapter 3 Study Guide
TR 3.8 Chapter 3 Test
TR 3.A Double Guess Game
*This TR Bible Study Answer key is also found on page 48.
CHAPTER 3 | 41


<!-- page-3 (book p.3) -->

CH
Lesson 1:
3.1-3.2
Review Chapter 2 Test. Have
students turn to page 38 in
their student textbook. Read the
objectives to the class. Go over
the answers to the Discussion
Questions for Chapter 3.1-3.2 on
page 46 in the student manual.
Have students turn to Activity:
Powerful Parables. Read the
directions. Assign the homework.
O Students will be able to express
the power of stories. [3.1]
explain the importance of
understanding the biblical
metanarrative. [3.2]
ENRICHMENT
© Have students read the article
Your Identity in God's Story
by Natasha Smith in the
online Teacher Resources.
42 | CHAPTER 3
1. What are some stories that echo the biblical story of creation,
fall, and redemption? [3.1]
2. How do stories communicate meaning? [3.1]
Because stories take events and organize them into a narrative with a
definite beginning and end, they suggest that events have a purpose
or goal. Stories provide purpose and meaning to the lives of their
characters, suggesting that our lives also form a cohesive whole with
purpose and meaning. Life is not just a series of accidents.
3. What does it mean to be middled? Have you ever felt middled?
[3.1]
Answers will vary but should include: To be middled is to be stuck
in the middle of a story, unsure of how to proceed —what to do,
how to act—because we do not know the details of our beginning,
and we are uncertain of where our stories are going or how they will
end.
4. How can we discern the meaning of our lives? [3.2]
To discern the meaning of our lives, it is essential to understand
we are part of a bigger story. This requires us to evaluate which
metanarrative best explains reality and best describes the world
we live in. Knowing God's story is the true metanarrative helps us
understand our purpose and determine how to act in any situation.
The Bible explains God's big story and guides us in how to live in
that story.
5. In what ways does the biblical story provide meaning and
purpose for our lives? [3.2]
The biblical story gives us meaning by showing us who God is
(Creator, Sustainer, Redeemer, Friend), who we are (people loved
by God and made in his image, yet fallen), what we need (salvation
from sin and inner transformation), what Jesus has done for us (died
on the cross to conquer death and atone for sin), what God wants to
do for the world (bring healing and restoration), and how we can get
involved in what God is doing (through proclaiming the gospel and
living out the teachings of God's Word).
POWERFUL PARABLES
Students will analyze the
1. Have volunteers read the parable of the rich fool in
meaning two parables from
Luke 12:13-21. Direct students to choose a partner.
the book of Luke.
Challenge students to analyze the parable and
answer the question: What do you think was Jesus
• Materials needed: Bible.
• Time required:
10-15 minutes
main point in telling this parable? Ask for volunteers
to share their answers with the class and discuss.
2. Direct volunteers to read the parable of the persistent
widow in Luke 18:1-8. Have students analyze the
parable with their partner and answer the question:
What do you think was Jesus' main point in telling
this parable? Ask for volunteers to share their
answers with the class and discuss. Answers will vary.
CHAPTER 3 | 43


<!-- page-4 (book p.45) -->

CH
Lesson 2:
3.3-3.4 P
Read the objectives to the class.
Go over the answers to the
Discussion Questions for Chapter
3.3-3.4. Have students turn to
Activity: The Truth about Sin
in their student manual. Use PS
3.2 The Truth about Sin to lead
students through the activity.
Assign the homework.
describe three main traits
of imago Dei and the four
relationships for which human
beings were designed. [3.3]
articulate how the first sin
affected God's perfect creation.
[3.4]
Option A
"Sin is no big deal."
44 CHAPTER 3
1. Did God need to create human beings? Why or why not? [3.3]
The Bible teaches that God is love and he is totally self-sufficient.
Because God is a Trinity—three persons who exist in a harmonious
relationship as one Being—he already has everything he needs.
Therefore, God did not need to create us. He created us out of love
so that we might share in the life-giving love of the Trinity.
2. What are three aspects of being made in God's image? Briefly
describe each aspect. [3.3]
• Rule: humans are given responsibility to steward and care for
creation.
• Relationship: humans are made for relationship with God,
themselves, others, and creation.
• Resemblance: humans are endowed with God-imitating attributes
(such as wisdom, love, and power) that help them accomplish the
work God gave them to do.
3. How do people glorify God? [3.3]
Glory is the weight or value of something. We glorify God when we
live as the people he created us to be-ruling and stewarding wisely,
living in right relationships, and exercising our godly attributes to
bless others and creation.
4. What are some ways you can glorify God? [3.3]
5. Explain the doctrine of original sin. [3.4]
Original sin is the idea that sin entered the world through the
rebellion of Adam and Eve and has since been passed to all people so
that all people inherit a sinful nature. We are born in slavery to sin
and all aspects of our lives are fallen. There is nothing we can do to
save ourselves.
THE TRUTH ABOUT SIN
Students will contrast common
• Materials needed: PS 3.2
misunderstandings about sin
• Time required: 20-25 minutes
with the Bible's teachings.
1. Select three students to read each of the following verses in this order: 1 John 3:4,
Romans 5:12, and Romans 6:23. Ask a student volunteer to explain what sin and its
consequences are based on these verses.
2. Display slide 1 from PS 3.2 The Truth about Sin. Read the Option A statement. Ask
students if they think this viewpoint is more prevalent in the church or in the culture.
Read the Option B statement and repeat the process. Have student volunteers explain
their answers.
3. Select two student volunteers to each read one of the following passages: John
3:16-18 and 1 Corinthians 6:9-11. Explain that it can be easy to think of sin as less
serious than it is or to think some sins make people unredeemable. Ask students how
the Bible corrects our misconceptions about the nature of sin-to miss the goal, to fail
to love God and others. Guide students to understand how the Bible shows us that
Christ's sacrifice is enough to cover any sin and redeem any person who turns to him
(John 3:16).
4. Display slide 2. Read the Option C and D statements. Have students consider which
viewpoint best describes their own tendency and which seems more prevalent among
their peers. Ask students to raise their hand if they feel their own tendency is toward
Option C. Then have those who feel Option D is closer to their own tendency to raise
their hand. Do the same with those who feel the viewpoint is more prevalent among
people in their age group. Briefly discuss any trends in the results with the class. Have
student volunteers explain why they chose their answer.
5. Have student volunteers read Romans 8:1, Romans 12:3, 1 John 1:8-9, and 1 John
3:20. Explain that the Bible teaches Christians that we are not to think of ourselves
self-righteously (seeing our own sins as less serious than others') and that we are not
to think of ourselves as constantly condemned, guilty, or ashamed before God. Our
conscience may be stirred when we have sinned, but continuing to hold on to guilt or
shame after we've confessed our sin to God is, in a way, refusing to trust that we are
fully forgiven. God's Word reminds us to confess our sins to God and rest in his mercy
and grace (Psalm 103:12). We can live out our freedom in Christ fully and joyfully
because we know God loves us, hears, forgives, and transforms us.
CHAPTER 3 |


<!-- page-5 (book p.3) -->

CH
Lesson 3:
3.5-3.6
Read the objectives to the class.
Go over the answers to the
Discussion Questions for Chapter
3.5-3.6. Have students turn to
Activity: Types of Christ Bible
Study in their student manual.
Read the directions. Assign the
homework.
summarize Israel's role in
God's redemptive plan. [3.5]
describe Israel's struggles
and hopes during the second
temple period. [3.6]
46 | CHAPTER 3
1. Why did God choose the nation of Israel to be his chosen
people? What responsibilities did this entail? [3.5]
God didn't choose Israel because they were the biggest or the best
nation, but because of his love and faithfulness to his covenant with
Abraham. God chose them to be a "God-shaped community" before
the nations, with responsibilities to demonstrate life in relationship
with God through obedience to his law.
2. How was Israel intended to "be a God-shaped community"
before the nations? [3.5]
Israel would be a light to the nations by showing what life
in relationship with and under God could look like. They
demonstrated this by obeying God's law and being faithful to
the covenant.
3. What did it mean for the Israelites to "seek the welfare" of
the places they had been exiled to? How might this apply to
Christians today? [3.6]
Possible answer: The Israelites were to work for the good of the
places in which they were exiled. They were not to live passively
while they waited to return to their homeland. Neither were they
to be a violent, revolutionary mob. In a sense, Christians today also
live in exile. As we await the full implementation of God's kingdom,
we are to be active, serving God every day and working for the
benefit of those around us. We can do this by getting involved in
community affairs and serving in the local church.
4. What four groups of Jews were prominent during the second
temple period? [3.6]
• Pharisees: popular Jewish leaders who taught strict observance to
the Torah and oral tradition
• Sadducees: Jewish priests and teachers who cooperated with the
ruling powers
• Essenes: devout Jews who fled to the desert [Note: They formed
separatist communities in order to distance themselves from the
corruption of the temple.]
• Zealots: political revolutionaries who advocated the violent
overthrow of the Romans
5. How might the hopes of the Jewish people during the second
temple period inspire Christians today? [3.6]
Possible answer: The Jewish people hoped for deliverance from their
enemies, the establishment of shalom, the arrival of God's kingdom,
the forgiveness of sins, and a victorious messiah. Like the Jewish
people during the second temple period, many Christians today experience
criticism or persecution for their beliefs. Jesus' fulfillment of the hopes of Israel
gives us confidence that God will fulfill his promise to make all things new and
motivates us to keep serving him.
TYPES OF CHRIST BIBLE STUDY
Students will correlate types of
• Materials needed: TR 3.3, Bible,
Christ in the Old Testament to
and pen
their fulfillment in Jesus.
• Time required: 25-30 minutes
1. Explain to the class that healthy Bible reading relies on the concept, let Scripture
interpret Scripture. One way to do this is to examine the typology of Christ. In the Old
Testament, certain historical figures or symbols foreshadowed who Jesus was and
what he would do. These figures or symbols are called types of Christ because they
point to an event in Jesus' life or a role he would fill in the future.
2. Divide the class into eight groups and assign each group a type of Christ listed below:
• Adam-Genesis 3:1-21, 1 Corinthians 15:21-22, 45-49
• Isaac-Genesis 22:1-3, 7-14, John 3:16, Hebrews 11:17-19
• Jacob's ladder-Genesis 28:10-17, John 1:50-51
• Jonah-Jonah 1:17-2:10, Matthew 12:38-41, 1 Corinthians 15:3-6
• Joseph-Genesis 37:23-28, Matthew 26:14-16
• Passover lamb-Exodus 12:21-24, Leviticus 23:5-8, 1 Corinthians 5:7
• Rock-Exodus 17:1-7, 1 Corinthians 10:1-4
• Sacrificial lamb-Leviticus 1:1-4, 1 Peter 1:17-21
3. Direct groups to read the passages assigned to them and analyze how Christ is
represented in the Old Testament passage using the New Testament passage as a
guide. Have each group complete the Types of Christ Study.
4. Have each group choose a representative to briefly share their answers with the class.
Refer to the answer key to guide the discussion.
CHAPTER 3 | 47


<!-- page-6 -->

CH
3.5-3.6
(continued)
Also, available as TR 3.3
Types of Christ Bible Study
Answer Key
TYPES OF CHRIST BIBLE STUDY
ANSWER KEY
1. How does this type of Christ point to Jesus?
•Adam: Through Adam, death came into the world.
Through Christ came salvation and life.
• Isaac: Isaac was Abraham's only son. Jesus is God's only
begotten Son. God provided a sheep as a substitute for
Isaac's life. Jesus is the Lamb of God, the Substitute whose
death gives us life.
• Jacob's ladder: Jacob saw a restored relationship
between heaven and Earth. Jesus accomplished it.
• Jonah: Jonah spent three days in the whale's belly. Jesus
spent three days in the tomb.
• Joseph: Joseph and Jesus were both betrayed for pieces
of silver.
• Passover lamb: The Passover lamb lived among the
people, was unblemished, and provided protection
through its blood. Christ lived among us, was sinless, and
shed his blood to rescue us from God's justice.
• Rock: The rock provided water to satisfy Israel's physical
thirst. Jesus satisfies our spiritual thirst.
• Sacrificial lamb: The unblemished male lamb provided a
temporary covering for sin. Jesus provided a permanent
covering for sin.
2. What did you learn about how the Old Testament connects
to the New Testament?
Possible answer: The Old Testament and New Testament
are deeply interconnected. Many images and examples
in the Old Testament point forward to Christ. The New
Testament points back to the Old Testament to explain that
Christ is God incarnate, Redeemer, and Savior.
Lesson 4:
3.7-3.8 P
Read the objectives to the
class. Go over the answers to
the Discussion Questions for
Chapter 3.7-3.8. Direct students
to turn to Activity: Beautiful
Atonement in their student
manual. Have copies of TR 3.4
Beautiful Atonement available.
Read the directions. Assign the
homework.
• Students will be able to explain
how Jesus accomplished
redemption. [3.7]
relate how the gospel brings
reconciliation to all our
relationships. [3.8]
O Students will be able to discuss
the role of the church in
spreading the gospel. [3.8]
48 | CHAPTER 3
5 The Shape of God's Story
1. What did Jesus mean when he said, "The time is fulfilled, and
the kingdom of God is at hand; repent and believe in the gospel"
(Mark 1:15): [3.7]
Jesus claimed that the kingdom of God-the just and peaceful rule
of God over all creation-
-which Israel had been longing for, was
finally arriving in Jesus' life and ministry. People needed to prepare
for God's kingdom by repenting and turning to God.
2. In what ways was Jesus a different Messiah from the one the
Jews were expecting? [3.7]
The Jews hoped for a messiah who would crush Israel's enemies,
conquer and rule with power, and commend and approve those who
observed the law. In contrast, Jesus urged people to forgive and bless
their enemies. He came in humility and preached about sacrificial
and self-giving love. He condemned the Jewish leaders for their
hypocrisy, and he associated with the outcasts and people seen as
unredeemable.
3. Explain the gospel in your own words. [3.7]
Possible answer: The gospel has two vital pieces. First, the good news
that Jesus Christ is Lord. He is the rightful Ruler of the universe, the
Creator of all things, and the One to whom our ultimate allegiance
is due. The gospel is the good news that Jesus is Savior-through
him, salvation and forgiveness are available to all. Because Jesus was
fully God and fully man, he lived a perfect human life and make
the ultimate atoning sacrifice for our sins, justifying us before God.
Anyone who places faith in Christ will be saved.
4. What is significant about using the word ekklesia to describe
the church rather than words like heranos and thiasos? [3.8]
In the Roman world, an ekklesia was a public assembly. The words
heranos and thiasos referred to private religious cults offering
otherworldly salvation. By using the word ekklesia to describe
themselves, the church declared itself a public body for this world.
The church has a mission for the sake of all people. It proclaims
a message for all people. This sets the church apart from private
religious cults that offer otherworldly salvation for a select few who
can acquire the secret knowledge necessary to obtain it.
CHAPTER 3 | 49


<!-- page-7 (book p.3) -->

CH
3.7-3.8
(continued)
5. What does the gospel message mean for our relationships with
God, ourselves, others, and nature? [3.8]
The gospel means that our sins can be forgiven, and we can be
justified before God. We can have peace with God and be in right
relationship with him. We can be set free from sin's power over us.
The Holy Spirit comes to live within us and transforms us into the
image of Jesus. Through the Holy Spirit living within us, we can
learn how to love, forgive, live at peace with, and be reconciled to
others. We can be restored to our image-bearing vocations and once
again take up the responsibility of wise stewardship. We can use our
creativity to bring abundance to God's world as we wait for him to
make all things new.
BEAUTIFUL ATONEMENT
Students will correlate Bible verses and early church father
quotations to one of the aspects of the atonement.
• Materials needed: TR 3.4, Bible, and pen
• Time required: 20-25 minutes
1. Divide the class into four groups. Distribute one copy
of TR 3.4 Beautiful Atonement to each group. Assign
each group one of the four sets of verses below and the
accompanying quotation from an early church father.
•Group 1: Isaiah 53:1-11; Romans 3:21-26, 5:9,
5:18-19; 2 Corinthians 5:21; Hebrews 9:28; 1 Peter
2:24 "For this end the Lord endured to deliver up
his flesh to corruption that we might be sanctified
through the remission of sins which is affected by his
blood of sprinkling. For it is written concerning him,
partly with reference to Israel and partly to us, and
the Scripture saith thus 'He was wounded for our
transgressions and bruised for our iniquities, with his
stripes we are healed. He was brought as a sheep to
the slaughter and as a lamb which is dumb before its
shearers'" (Epistle of Barnabas, Chapter 5, written
between AD 70-135)
• Group 2: Mark 10:41-45; 1 Corinthians 6:20; Ephesians 1:7; 1 Timothy 2:5-6;
Hebrews 9:12, 15; 1 Peter 1:19 "But when our wickedness had reached its
height, and it had been clearly shown that its reward, punishment and death,
was impending over us... how the one love of God, through exceeding regard
for men, did not regard us with hatred, nor thrust us away, nor remember
our iniquity against us, but showed great longsuffering, and bore with us, He
Himself took on the burden of our iniquities, He gave His own Son as a ransom
for us, the holy One for transgressors, the blameless One for the wicked, the
righteous one for the unrighteous, the incorruptible One for the corruptible,
the immortal One for them that are mortal." (Epistle of Mathetes to Diognetus,
written in the second or third century)
• Group 3: John 16:33; Romans 6:5-14; 1 Corinthians 15:55-58; 2 Corinthians
2:14; Colossians 2:15;1 John 4:4; 1 John 5:3-5; Revelation 12:11 "But if our
physician Christ, God, having rescued us from our desires, regulates our flesh
with His own wise and temperate rule, it is evident that He guards it from sins
because it possesses a hope of salvation, as physicians do not suffer men whom
they hope to save to indulge in what pleasures they please." (Justin Martyr, On
the Resurrection, Chapter 10, written early-to-mid second century)
•Group 4: John 3:16; Romans 5:10; 2 Corinthians 5:17-21; Ephesians 2:14-21;
Colossians 1:15-23 "But now, by means of communion with himself, the Lord
has reconciled to God the Father, in reconciling us to Himself by the body of
his own flesh, and redeeming us by his own blood, as the apostle says to the
Ephesians, 'In whom we have redemption through His blood, the remission of
sins'.... And in every Epistle the apostle plainly testifies, that through the flesh
of our Lord, and through His blood, we have been saved." (Ireanaeus, Fragments
from the Lost Writings of Ireneus, Chapter 14, written prior to AD 203)
2. Direct groups to read the verses and early church father quotations associated
with their group number and complete TR 3.4. Have groups present their answers
to the class.
3. Explain that both the New Testament and early church fathers confirm these
various aspects of the atonement. Have a student volunteer read the quote from
New Testament scholar Leon Morris in TR 3.4 to the class. Discuss the following
question with the class: Why is it important to acknowledge all the different
aspects of the atonement rather than just one?
Possible Answer: While it can be easy to overfocus on one aspect or
exclude another, they are not in competition or mutually exclusive. They
work together to contribute to the beauty, power, and purpose of Christ's
redeeming work on the cross.
50 | CHAPTER 3
CHAPTER 3 | 51


<!-- page-8 (book p.3) -->

CH
Lesson 5:
3.9-3.10
Read the objective to the class. Go
over the answers to the Discussion
Questions for Chapter 3.9-3.10.
Have students turn to Activity:
Six Views on Purpose Bible
Study in their student manual.
Have one copy of TR 3.5 Six
Views on Purpose Answers
available. Read the directions.
(Optional) Assign TR 3.SG
Chapter 3 Study Guide to
prepare for Chapter 3 Test.
OBJECTIVE
describe what will take place
during the second coming and
new creation. [3.9]
ENRICHMENT ACTIVITY
© Use TR 3.A Activity: Clues
and Guesses in class for an
additional or alternate class
activiry.
52 | CHAPTER 3
1. What does it mean that the kingdom of God is "already, but
not yet," and what does this mean for the church today? [3.9]
God's kingdom has already been inaugurated in Christ. Jesus is
reigning over the world right now. Yet, the world is still plagued
by evil because God's kingdom has not yet been fully realized. The
kingdom is a hidden reality because it is recognized in humility
and suffering, not heavy-handed domination. The church is living
in an in-between time and is tasked with announcing the good
news that God reigns. The good news is threatening to those in this
world who persist in evil, idolatry, and injustice. So, Christians will
face persecution for their faith. The faithfulness of Christians amid
persecution serves as a sign that points others to Jesus.
2. What will the new heavens and earth be like? [3.9]
In the new heavens and earth, evil will be banished forever. God's
kingdom will be fully inaugurated, and his peaceful rule will be
established. There will be complete reconciliation and intimacy
between God and humans. Suffering, sorrow, and death will cease.
There will be healing for the nations. There will be no barriers to
God's presence. There will be people from every nation, tribe, and
tongue worshipping God. We will live in freedom, peace, and love
toward one another. We will be given new bodies so we can flourish.
3. Which aspects of it are you most excited about? [3.9]
4. How does a person become a Christian? [3.10]
We become Christians by trusting Jesus as Lord and Savior. This
involves the following:
• Recognizing that we are God's image bearers and loved by him.
• Acknowledging the ways we have sinned, as well as our
powerlessness to save ourselves.
• Trusting in what Jesus did for us on the cross—he gave his life to
atone for our sins and free us from the power of evil.
• Committing to follow Jesus as Lord.
5. What does it mean to say that Christianity is the true story of
the whole world? [3.10]
Christianity is the true story of the whole world because it is not just
a message about individual salvation but good news for all creation.
It is good news for all people at all times and places. It is a story that
speaks to and transcends all cultures-past, present, and future.
APOLOGETICS 5
SIX VIEWS ON PURPOSE BIBLE STUDY
Students will contrast
1. Have students read the comparative worldview
competing worldviews with
analysis in the Six Views on Purpose Bible Study in
the Christian understanding
their students manual and complete the exercises.
of meaning and purpose.
2. Have students discuss their answers. Use TR 3.5
Six Views on Purpose Answers as needed.
• Materials needed: TR 3.5,
Bible, and pen
• Time required:
25-30 minutes
CHAPTER 3 53


<!-- page-9 (book p.3) -->

CH
Lesson 6:
Videos P
In this lesson, students will
view four interviews of various
Christian educators and authors.
Each expert answers a specific
worldview or apologetics
question. These videos will allow
students to expand their
knowledge and provide biblical
answers to thought-provoking
questions. The following videos
will be used in today's lesson:
1. Is Jesus Relevant for Everyone?
(Wallace, 4:56)
2. Will Jesus Come Back?
(Jizmejian, 1:52)
3. Is Evangelism Disrespectful?
(Shlemon, 2:04)
4. How Do We Evangelize Well?
(Kunkle, 6:36)
Play the videos one at a time in
the order listed above. Before
each video, direct students to
read the questions associated
with that video in their student
manual so they know what to
listen for. After the video has been
shown, students should write
their answers to the Discussion
Questions. It may be necessary to
play the video again so students
can answer all the questions.
Go over the questions for the
first video. Play the next video.
Continue this way until the
last video has been played and
questions have been discussed.
54 | CHAPTER 3
VIDEO DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
• Video 1:
Is Jesus Relevant for Everyone?
1. Literature, art, music, education, and science are all utterly
dependent on whom?
All of these disciplines are dependent on Jesus of Nazareth. He has
more impact on them than any other historical figure.
2. If all copies of the New Testament were to be destroyed, how
could you reconstruct the story of Jesus from other writings?
You could reconstruct the story of Jesus using just the writings of
the non-Christians in the first three centuries of the Common Era.
Common Era (cE) is equivalent to Anno Domini (AD). Anno Domini
means "in the year of our Lord."
3. If the New Testament were destroyed, how could the gospel
story be reconstructed from music?
Jesus passed on Jewish song tradition to the early church. You could
reconstruct the gospel story just by using the hymns of the early
Christians in the first three centuries.
4. Which innovations in music arose from the Christian
tradition?
Christians innovated musical notation, harmonies, major and minor
scales, most instruments, and most genres today.
5. What impact did Christians have on education and science?
Christians founded the modern university as we know it today. More
scientists and Nobel laureates in the sciences are Christ-followers
than every other worldview group combined. The fathers of science
are dominantly Christians.
Video 2:
Will Jesus Come Back?
1. Where is the gospel spreading rapidly?
The gospel is exploding in the global south and global east.
2. How can the spread of the gospel 2,000 years later give us
hope?
This gives us hope that the gospel is still something to form a life
around.
3. Why can we still trust that Jesus will come back?
We can trust that Jesus will come back because God is still moving, still at work,
still the God of history, and still desires relationship with humans.
Video 3:
Is Evangelism Disrespectful?
1. Why do many people think Christian evangelism is disrespectful?
People think it's disrespectful because evangelism implies that you think you are
right and that the other person is wrong.
2. Why doesn't it make sense to say it's wrong only for Christians to think
they are right?
It doesn't make sense because in any disagreement, both people think they are
right. Non-Christians also think they are right.
3. How does the Bible show that evangelism isn't disrespectful?
The Bible commands us to evangelize. The Bible gives us God's commands, and
God would not command us to do something that is disrespectful.
• Video 4:
How Do We Evangelize Well?
1. In Acts 1:8, what did Jesus say that his followers would be?
Jesus said we are to be his witnesses.
2. What is the primary goal and purpose of the New Testament church?
The primary goal is to go and make disciples, to share the gospel.
3. According to the speaker, what four gospel-sharing tools are modeled in
the book of Acts?
The four tools include public proclamation, personal engagement, reasoning
process, and meeting the physical needs of others before the spiritual needs.
4. What are the benefits of asking questions in evangelism?
Questions can help begin a conversation and also get people interested. They
also help us discern the other person's thoughts and feelings.
5. How do these gospel-sharing methods relate to the role of the Holy Spirit?
With the Holy Spirit, all these methods work. Without him, nothing works.
© The Shape of God's Story
CHAPTER 3 | 55


<!-- page-10 (book p.3) -->

CH
Lesson 7:
and
Review P
Have students turn in their
student manual to Activity: The
Better Story. Have students
work in groups of two or three.
Use PS 3.7 The Better Story
to lead students through the
activity. Display PS 3.7 Chapter
3 Review to review the concepts
in Chapter 3. Allow students to
discuss chapter concepts, take
notes, and use TR 3.SG Chapter
3 Study Guide.
CHAPTER 3 REVIEW
Key Terms
metanarrative
imago Dei
kingdom of God
gospel
church
second coming
Key Verses
Genesis 1:1
Genesis 1:27
Genesis 12:1-3
John 3:16
Colossians 2:13-15
56 | CHAPTER 3
THE BETTER STORY
Students will contrast the biblical storyline with a self-
serving worldview.
• Materials needed: PS 3.7, white paper, ruler, and markers
• Time required: 25-30 minutes
1. Distribute one piece of white paper, a ruler, and markers
to each group.
2. Explain that few people in our culture have a pure
worldview system. Eighty-eight percent of people in
the United States, for example, hold to a mixed set of
beliefs.' One of the most common mixed belief sets
includes the following ideas:
• God remains distant from people's lives.
• People are supposed to be good to each other.
• The universal purpose of life is being happy and
feeling good.
• There are no absolute moral truths.
• God allows "good people" into heaven.
• God places very limited demands on people.?
3. Have students briefly discuss the question: How
does this set of beliefs contrast with the biblical
metanarrative?
4. Display slide 1 of PS 3.7 The Better Story. Explain to students they will first analyze
the biblical metanarrative. Point out the six acts of God's story across the bottom
of the graph. Explain the basic plot points of a story-introduction, rising action,
climax, falling action, and conclusion. Invite student volunteers to fill in the blanks
on the slide with the main events for each part of the biblical storyline. Display
slide 2 and compare the answers.
5. Now have students suggest examples of famous stories in which a hero sacrificed
him or herself for others. (Example: Aslan in Chronicles of Narnia, Queen Esther in
the Old Testament.) Discuss the following questions:
• How would it affect the stories if the character decided to follow "their truth"
and pursue their own happiness instead of sacrificing themselves for others?
Answer: The world or person in danger would not have been saved. All
would have been lost.
• How would the biblical storyline be affected if Jesus had chosen his own
comfort instead of giving his life for us?
Answer: Perhaps we would not have a way to be reconciled to God.
6. Display slide 3 as a template. Direct groups to draw a graph depicting a
metanarrative if the hero, Jesus, had a self-serving worldview and decided to avoid
going to the cross.
7. Have groups share their graphs with the class.
Answer: Graph designs will vary but should demonstrate the disastrous
consequences that would have occurred if Jesus had never died and risen
from the dead. Students may express the story in different ways.)
8. Read Matthew 26:36-42 and Hebrews 12:2. Discuss the following questions:
• Do you think it was easy for Jesus to go to the cross?
Answer: It wasn't easy for him because in the garden of Gethsemane, Jesus
expressed distress over the suffering he would experience. Still, he willingly
suffered and died for our sins.
• According to Hebrews 12:2, why did Jesus choose to go to the cross?
Answer: Jesus died on the cross because he knew that the joy waiting for him
was worth the horrible suffering that he would endure on the cross.
' Barna, George. "American Worldview Inventory 2021 Release #1: America's Dominant Worldview Syncretism."
Cultural Research Center, Arizona Christian University. April 13, 2021. https://www.arizonachristian.edu/wp-content/
uploads/2021/05/CRC_AWV12021_Release01_Digital_ 01_20210413.pdf.
2 Barna, George. "American Worldview Inventory 2021 Release #02: Introducing America's Most Popular Worldview-
Moralistic Therapeutic Deism." Cultural Research Center, Arizona Christian University. April 27, 2021. htrps://www.
arizonachristian.edu/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/CRC_AWV12021_Release02_Digital_01_20210427.pdf.
CHAPTER 3 | 57


<!-- page-11 -->

CH
Chapter 3
Test P
Distribute TR 3.8 Chapter 3 Test to each student and allow time
for them to complete the exercises. Students who finish early may
start reading Chapter 4. Assign the homework.
Notes
Participating in
58 | CHAPTER 3
