# Chapter 5

<!-- page-1 (book p.4) -->

CH
Chapter 4
Test P
Distribute TR 4.8 Chapter 4 Test to each student and allow time
for them to complete the exercises. Students who finish early may
start reading Chapter 5. Assign the homework.
Notes
Empowered
to Love
76 1 CHAPTER 4


<!-- page-2 (book p.1) -->

Empowered to Love
Chapter 5 Syllabus
Lesson
Additional/alternate content
REVIEW
WATCH
REVIEW FOR
GIVE
STUDY FOR
Assignment
Chapter 4 Test
Questions for Chapter 5.1-5.2
Activity: Forestall Your Fears
Chapter 5.3-5.4
Questions for Chapter 5.3-5.4
Questions for Chapter 5.3-5.4
Activity: At the Foot of the Cross
Chapter 5.5-5.6
Questions for Chapter 5.5-5.6
Questions for Chapter 5.5-5.6
Activity: Preparation Strategy
Chapter 5.7-5.8
Questions for Chapter 5.7-5.8
Questions for Chapter 5.7-5.8
Activity: A Closer Look
Chapter 5.9-5.10
Questions for Chapter 5.9-5.10
Questions for Chapter 5.9-5.10
Activity: Harvest Bible Study
Videos
Video Questions
Video Questions
Activity: How They Got Ready
Chapter 6.1-6.2
Questions for Chapter 6.1-6.2
Activity: Our Prep and God's Prep
Study Guide Questions
Student Textbook (ST) Student Manual (SM)
78 | CHAPTER 5
S2
Page
ST 73-77
SM 88
ST 77-80
SM 91-92
84-85
85-86
ST 80-83
SM 94-95
87-88
ST 83-86
SM 96
91-92
SM 100-101
93-94
ST 87-91
SM 106
TR 5.A
TR 5.SG
Chapter 5
OVERVIEW
Despite persecution from the time of
Emperor Nero until today, the church grew,
and Christians spread the gospel around
the world. How did they do this? Fears of
rejection, hostility, embarrassment, and
much more often keep Christians silent, yet
Jesus promised to empower his disciples to
be his witnesses. He sent his Holy Spirit,
who gives us the courage to share the gospel.
Because God first loved us, we can reach
out to others with his love. This requires
humility and the willingness to help others
encounter Jesus at the foot of the cross.
He is the only one who can change hearts
and minds.
We are responsible for preparing
spiritually, intellectually, and emotionally
to share the truth about Jesus with others.
Spiritually, with confidence as God's beloved
children, we can confess our sins and pray as
we engage in spiritual warfare. Intellectually,
we can study the Bible, seek wise counsel,
and seek to understand others' perspectives.
Emotionally, we can assess our feelings and
others' responses and trust God to help us
in our conversations with others. We can
also consider practical aspects of evangelistic
and apologetic encounters, such as others'
receptiveness, timing, and power dynamics.
Jesus' encounter with the Samaritan
woman gives us a powerful example for our
conversations with others.
The Bible uses the metaphors of
planting, watering, and reaping to give
someone something to think about, help
that person consider the gospel, and support
him or her in making a decision for Christ.
Our role can vary, but the results are up to
God. We participate in his mission, ready
to follow the Holy Spirit's leading to share
Jesus with others.
PREPARATION P
Lesson 4:
Preview PS 5.4 A Closer Look
to become familiar with the
activity. Also, print a copy of TR
5.4 A Closer Look Answer Key for
yourself.
Lesson 6:
Access and preview the videos
listed in Lesson 6. See the inside
back cover of this manual for
video-streaming instructions.
Lesson 7:
Computers will be needed for the
activity.
Make one copy of TR 5.8 Chapter 5
Test for each student.
LESSON MATERIALS
Presentation Slides
PS 5.4 A Closer Look
PS 5.7 Chapter 5 Review
Teacher Resources
TR 5.4 A Closer Look Answer Key
TR 5.5 Harvest Bible Study Answers*
TR 5.SG Chapter 5 Study Guide
TR 5.8 Chapter 5 Test
TR 5.A Our Prep and God's Prep
*These TR Bible Study Answers are found on page 92.
CHAPTER 5 | 79


<!-- page-3 -->

Lesson 1:
5.1-5.2
Review Chapter 4 Test. Have
students turn to page 70 in
their student textbook. Read the
objectives to the class. Go over
the answers to the Discussion
Questions for Chapter 5.1-5.2 on
pages 86 in the student manual.
Forestall Your Fears. Read the
directions. Assign the homework.
OBJECTIVES:
• Students will be able to express
the fears that keep people from
sharing the gospel. [5.1]
O Students will be able to
describe the effect of the Holy
Spirit's power on the disciples
as they preached the gospel.
[5.2]
• Have students watch the
video, Who is the Holy Spirit
& What Does He Do? and
discussion questions by Pastor
Ken Robertson in the online
Teacher Resources.
| CHAPTER 5
1. What fears come to mind when you think about sharing your
faith? [5.1]
2. What do you think has historically given Christians the
courage to share their faith even in the midst of persecution?
[5.1]
Possible answers may include a reference to or dependence upon
the Holy Spirit, who provides courage and strength for the believer
when sharing the gospel, especially in the midst of persecution.
3. In what way is Jesus always with us as we share the gospel?
How does he empower us? [5.2]
Jesus is always present with us through the Helper he promised his
disciples he would send—the Holy Spirit. The Holy Spirit dwells
in the heart of every Christian, teaching and guiding us in the way
of Jesus. Just as the Spirit emboldened the disciples to share and
gave them the words to say when needed, we are also empowered by
God's Spirit, who goes before us and is always with us when we share
the gospel.
4. What happened on the day of Pentecost (Acts 2)? What does
this event tell you about where the power for mission comes
from? [5.2]
The Holy Spirit descended powerfully upon Jesus' followers as they
gathered in a house. They were filled with the Holy Spirit and began
to speak in human tongues. Some people who heard them thought
they were drunk, but Peter boldly preached a sermon about Jesus
and the need for repentance. People were amazed, and about 3,000
people became Christians that day. This overwhelming response
to the gospel was clearly the work of the Holy Spirit. The disciples
could speak boldly and powerfully in Jesus' name only because of
the Holy Spirit working within them. It was the Spirit who brought
about so many conversions that day, not the disciples charisma or
intellectual savvy.
FORESTALL YOUR FEARS
Students will create
1. Divide the class into seven groups. Have a student
strategies for handling
from each group choose a lettered point from below
common fears in sharing
from Chapter 5.1. Students cannot choose the same
the gospel.
letter.
2. Instruct students to put a mark in their student
• Materials needed: None
manual by the letter chosen:
a. fear of rejection or hostility from others
10-15 minutes
b. fear of embarrassment, forfeiting status, or losing
the respect of friends
c. fear of saying the wrong thing, confusing people,
or being a hindrance
d. fear of confronting someone with a message
about sin and repentance
e. fear of being unprepared or not having answers to
difficult questions or challenges to the faith
f. fear of inadequacy, lack of giftedness, or not
having a personality suited to the task
g. fear of spiritual attacks from Satan and his
demons
3. Have each group spend five to seven minutes
creating a list of ways or ideas to address the fears
assigned. Have groups present their lists to the class.
CHAPTER 5 | 81


<!-- page-4 (book p.5) -->

CH
Lesson 2:
5.3-5.4
Read the objectives to the class.
Go over the Discussion Questions
for Chapter 5.3-5.4. Have
students turn to Activity: At the
Foot of the Cross in their student
manual. Read the directions.
Assign the homework.
• Students will be able to discuss
the importance of love and
humility by comparing two
approaches to sharing the
gospel. [5.3]
• Students will be able to explain
three aspects of spiritual
preparation needed for sharing
the gospel. [5.4]
82 | CHAPTER 5
1. If love is the main motive for Christian mission, how can
Christians cultivate love for those who do not yet know Jesus?
[5.3]
We love because God loved us first. One of the best ways to cultivate
love for others is to abide in loving relationship with God. Our love
for him will grow as we get to know him better through prayer,
Scripture meditation, and other spiritual disciplines. When we
understand how much God loves us, we can't help but love others.
We can also cultivate love for others by intentionally building
friendships outside the church, serving non-Christians, and listening
to their stories.
2. Look at the first illustration in Chapter 5.3. Why is it
problematic? [5.3]
It is not inherently wrong to believe that you are right about
Christianity (or anything else). It is actually quite natural. However,
in this illustration, the Christian (intentionally or unintentionally)
approaches mission from a place of superiority. The attitude here is
often "I'm right, you're wrong." This approach may feel off-putting
or degrading and cause the other person to be defensive.
3. What does it mean to meet a non-Christian at the foot of the
cross? [5.3]
To meet a non-Christian at the foot of the cross means that we do
not approach him or her as though we have Christianity completely
figured out. We do not consider our understanding of the truth
infallible; instead, we admit the possibility that we could be wrong.
We submit ourselves to Jesus as the ultimate standard of truth and
invite the other person to consider him that way. When Christians
and non-Christians humbly meet at the foot of the cross, both
people may be changed.
4. Why is confession an integral part of spiritual preparation for
God's mission? [5.4]
Confession needs to be a regular part of our spiritual practice.
Confession allows us the opportunity to repent of our spiritual pride
and selfishness. It requires turning to God. It also guards us against
judging and condemning others.
5. How do Christians engage in spiritual warfare when sharing
the gospel? [5.4]
When sharing the gospel with unbelievers, we engage in spiritual
warfare—the ongoing struggle in which the powers of evil fight
against God and his people. We do this by praying that God would
work through us to break down the lies that hold non-Christians
captive. We pray that the Spirit would convict non-Christians of sin
and open their hearts and minds to the truth.
AT THE FOOT OF THE CROSS
Students will analyze
1. Have students choose a partner. Direct students
concepts and rewrite
to turn in their student manual to the At the Foot
them to gain a deeper
of the Cross Study. Facilitate class discussion on
understanding of how to
what each step means.
present the gospel with a
2. Have pairs discuss each of the steps listed and
loving approach.
allow time for students to use their own words to
describe each step.Invite pairs to share their ways
of implementing these steps.
• Materials needed: pen
15-20 minutes
AT THE FOOT OF THE CROSS
The student textbook compared two approaches to sharing the gospel with
others. In the first approach, Christians share the gospel from a superior
position. In the second approach, both Christians and non-Christians are
on the same level.
Christian
Non-Christian
Christian
Non-Christian
The second approach was described with the steps below. Discuss each
step with a partner. Consider what it means and how you would explain it
to someone else. Then describe the action of each sentence by rewriting
it in your own words.
1. Meet the other person at the foot of the cross.
2. Let go of our need to be right about everything.
3. Submit ourselves in faith to Jesus as the ultimate standard for truth.
4. Invite others to consider Jesus.
CHAPTER 5


<!-- page-5 (book p.5) -->

CH
Lesson 3:
5.5-5.6
Read the objectives to the
class. Go over the Discussion
Questions for Chapter 5.5-5.6.
Preparation Strategy in their
student manual. Read the
directions. Assign the homework.
summarize three ways to
intellectually prepare for
participation in God's mission.
[5.5]
© Students will be able to apply
five techniques to prepare
emotionally for evangelistic or
apologetic encounters. [5.6]
84 | CHAPTER 5
1. How can Christians become more knowledgeable about
Scripture? [5.5]
Reading and meditating on Scripture as a regular practice is the best
way to become more knowledgeable about Scripture. We can study
the Bible with others and listen to Christian teaching and sermons.
We can also use commentaries and other Bible resources to help us
better grasp the meaning of Scripture.
2. What makes someone a wise and competent mentor? What
qualities might you look for in a mentor? [5.5]
A good mentor is someone who has knowledge and experience in
the field you want to be mentored in. He or she is generally a good
listener and is slow to give advice. At the same time, a good mentor
will generously share what he or she has learned, point out how you
can grow, correct you when you are wrong, and encourage you in
your efforts.
3. What is philosophy? Why do Christians need to study other
perspectives and philosophies? [5.5]
Philosophy is the study of knowledge, truth, and the nature of
ultimate reality. Christians study other perspectives and philosophies
for several reasons. First, all truth is God's truth. Because of God's
grace, anyone can say true things and grasp elements of the truth.
We can learn by listening to people with perspectives different from
our own. Their perspectives may challenge us to think more deeply
about our own beliefs. Second, to reach non-Christians, we need to
understand their views. Finally, when we study other philosophies
in the company of wise mentors, we are less likely to be deceived by
worldly philosophies and human traditions.
4. What did the apostle Paul mean in Colossians 2:8 when he
referred to the world: [5.5]
In Colossians 2:8, Paul was not talking about the earth (God's
physical creation). Instead, Paul used the term the world to refer to
the spirit of the world which is in rebellion against God.
Note: In his book Expositions, Peter Abelard, a Catholic theologian
writing in the twelfth century, identified three enemies of the soul
as the world, the flesh, and the devil! Though the phrase is not found
in Scripture, it has been popular in Christian thought ever since,
cited by Thomas Aquinas, Martin Luther, Charles Spurgeon, and
many others. It is an effective way to summarize biblical teaching
on temptations to sin. Christians are warned not to give in to their
flesh (Romans 7:23-24, Galatians 5:24, Colossians 3:5), the world
(Romans 12:2, James 4:4; 1 John 2:15), or the devil (Ephesians
6:11, James 4:7, 1 Peter 5:8).
• Peter Abaelard, trans. Werner Robl, Expositions, Abaclard.de, September 2002, http://www.
abaelard.de/05051lexpositio.htm.
5. How can we tell the difference between the promptings of the Holy Spirit
and the influence of Satan when it comes to sharing the gospel? [5.6]
The Holy Spirit leads, guides, and invites; Satan pushes, pressures, and threatens.
If we feel pressured to share the gospel with someone when it might not be
appropriate or are threatened with shame if we don't, we can be confident
that those promptings are not from the Holy Spirit. God acts in a way that
is consistent with love and justice. This does not mean that the Holy Spirit's
promptings will always be easy to follow or that you will feel totally comfortable
sharing the gospel. God sometimes asks us to do hard things, but he also equips
and strengthens us to do them.
6. How can Christians live authentically? [5.6]
We are most authentic when living as the people God created us to be. Because
God created each of us uniquely, we live authentically when we live as ourselves,
not putting on masks to hide who we are or trying to be someone we are not.
Living authentically also means being appropriately honest about our feelings,
ideas, beliefs, and limitations. Those who live authentically can act confidently
out of their gifts and admit when they are wrong or unsure.
7. Have you ever experienced rejection or indifference when sharing the
gospel? Have you shared with people who were open to the gospel? [5.6]
PREPARATION STRATEGY
Students will develop a
1. Remind students they have considered various ways
personal strategy to prepare
to prepare to share the gospel. These include spiritual,
for sharing the gospel.
intellectual, and emotional aspects.
2. Direct students to complete the Preparation Strategy chart
• Materials needed: student
textbook and pen
10-15 minutes
in their student manual. Explain that students have two
ways to approach the task. They can complete the chart
thinking about how to prepare to share the gospel with a
specific person or group of people. Or they may complete
the chart thinking of the areas in which they feel the need
to be better equipped for future opportunities. Use the
Preparation Strategy Answer Key to guide students.
3. If time allows, lead students in prayer, asking God to help
them prepare for future opportunities in evangelism and
apologetics.
CHAPTER 5 | 85


<!-- page-6 -->

CH
5.5-5.6
PREPARATION STRATEGY ANSWER KEY
Possible answers my include:
SPIRITUAL
INTELLECTUAL
EMOTIONAL
What is the most
important step you
need to take to pre-
pare in this area?
Confession. I need
to repent of how l've
avoided talking to
Karissa about Jesus.
Study. I don't know
enough about what
the Bible teaches on
women to counter
Karissa's objections.
I don't need to be
afraid of what Karissa
might say.
What are some ways
that you can address
that need?
I can be honest with
myself and identify
why l've avoided such
conversations.
I can ask God to
change my attitude.
I can ask God to use
me to witness to
Karissa.
I can learn more
doing a topical Bible
study. can borrow
Christian books from
the library. I can
search online for
information. I can
ask the youth group
leader how to answer
Karissa.
I can ask God to give
me courage and to
show me what would
be a good way to
talk to Karissa
about Jesus.
I can engage in
conversation with
Karissa more often
so that | can better
understand her.
What can you act on?
When?
I will pray about this
tonight before | go to
bed.
I will talk to my youth
group leader after the
meeting on Sunday.
Before school ends
this week, I will make
plans to spend time
with Karissa.
Lesson 4:
5.7-5.8 ₽
Read the objectives to the
class. Go over the Discussion
Questions for Chapter 5.7-5.8.
A Closer Look in their student
manual. Read the directions and
display PS 5.4 A Closer Look.
Refer to TR 5.4 A Closer Look
Answer Key as needed. Assign
the homework.
employ various practical
considerations to share the
gospel more effectively. [5.7]
O Students will be able to
describe principles for
evangelism and apologetics
from Jesus conversation with
the Samaritan woman. [5.8]
© Have students read the
article, Women Witnesses:
How Jesus Meets and
Elevates the Status of
Women, by Natasha Smith, in
the online Teacher Resources.
86 | CHAPTER 5
1. When are you most likely to accept new ideas, change your
mind, or receive correction? [5.7]
Answers will vary but may include:
• When I am listened to, loved, respected, and not talked down to
• When the other person is interested in my beliefs and desires
• When the other person is genuinely concerned about me and not
just trying to convert me
2. What are some ways that you could show a non-Christian that
you are genuinely concerned about his or her flourishing? [5.7]
Answers will vary but may include:
•Listening attentively to his or her story and asking questions
• Developing a genuine friendship with the non-Christian
•Getting to know his or her dreams and desires and showing how
Christianity relates to those things
•Being truthful with him or her, quick to acknowledge when you are
puzzled, don't know, or are wrong about something
•Treating them with respect no matter what he or she believes
• Showing genuine concern if you see the non-Christian going down
a bad path
3. Is any and every time a good time to share the gospel? Why or
why not? [5.7]
The Bible says there is a time to be silent and a time to speak. It may
be wise to be silent in certain situations, like during work hours
when conversation distracts from or hinders the work. It may also be
prudent to refrain when a person is hostile or requests explicitly that
you stop sharing the gospel with them.
4. Why is it important to pay attention to power dynamics in our
encounters with non-Christians? [5.7]
Sometimes, people feel pressured to accept certain information from
others because the other person is older, of a different gender, or, in
some other way seems to possess greater power. When people feel
threatened or uncomfortable in evangelistic situations (even if no
one is intentionally threatening them), they may verbally consent
to the gospel to protect themselves or lessen the pressure. Still, they
may not truly hear or accept the gospel.
5. What is the difference between tolerance and love? [5.7]
Tolerance means getting along and living peaceably with people
you do not like or disagree with on some point. It gives people the
freedom to disagree with you and choose their own path. Love goes
beyond mere tolerance. Love is intentional in service and sacrifice for
others, especially those we dislike or disagree with.
CHAPTER 5 | 87


<!-- page-7 -->

CH
5.7-5.8
wE Clost Look - Answer Key
6. How did Jesus upset social norms in his conversation with the
woman at the well? [5.8]
Jesus' encounter with the woman at the well would have been
socially awkward for at least two reasons. First, Jews and Samaritans
were bitter enemies and had no dealings with each other, but Jesus,
a Jew, gladly spoke to a Samaritan. The encounter is even more
surprising because the Samaritan was a woman. Since women had
low social status at that time, it would have been unusual for a rabbi
to engage a woman in theological conversation. Jesus was willing to
engage the Samaritan woman despite her gender and ethnicity. He
cared about her and treated her with the dignity she deserved.
7. What important lessons can we learn from Jesus' encounter
with the woman at the well? [5.8]
Jesus' encounter with the woman at the well has several implications
for our mission:
• The gospel is for everyone regardless of ethnicity, gender, or class.
• We need to take people seriously and treat them with dignity and
respect.
• It is not our job to condemn sin in another person; instead, we can
offer them the opportunity for honest self-reflection.
•Our message should be addressed to the whole person, engaging
the mind and addressing human longings.
• We should try, when possible, to avoid getting entangled in
unimportant controversies and instead keep the focus on Jesus.
• We don't need to pressure others into making a decision. Jesus did
not pressure the woman to trust him.
A CLOSER LOOK
Students will examine
six practical factors for
evangelism in Jesus'
conversation with the
woman at the well.
• Materials needed: PS 5.4,
TR 5.4, and Bible
15-20 minutes
1. Display PS 5.4 A Closer Look. Have
students take turns reading the first two
slides.
2. Choose one or more students to
read John 4:1-30, 39-42 aloud while
classmates follow along in their Bible.
3. Display slide 3. Lead the class in
discussing the questions. Students may
use their Bible as needed. Refer to TR 5.4
A Closer Look Answer Key as needed.
88 | CHAPTER 5
APOLOGETICS G
CHAPTER 5 | 89


<!-- page-8 (book p.5) -->

CH
Lesson 5:
5.9-5.10
Read the objective to the class. Go
over the Discussion Questions for
Chapter 5.9-5.10. Have students
turn to Activity: Harvest Bible
Study in their student manual.
Read the directions. (Optional)
Assign TR 5.SG Chapter 5
Study Guide to help prepare for
Chapter 5 Test.
OBJECTIVE
summarize three stages in
evangelism. [5.9]
ENRICHMENT ACTIVITY
• Use TR 5.A Activity: Our
Prep and God's Prep in class
for an additional or alternate
class activity.
90 CHAPTER 5
1. Which of the three tasks—planting, watering, and reaping—is
most important in Christian mission? Explain your answer. [5.9]
All three tasks are equally important in God's mission; no task is
more essential than another. The one who plants may never see
the reaping, but if there had been no planting, there would be no
reaping. The watering stage is essential because it helps the seed to
grow. Any role we play in a person's journey toward Jesus matters to
God.
2. Describe a time when you spiritually planted, watered,
or reaped in someone else's life or when someone spiritually
planted, watered, or reaped in your life. [5.9]
3. Why do you think no one-size-fits-all method guarantees
results for evangelism and apologetics? [5.10]
Answers will vary, but they may include that because God designed
every human being to be unique, our approach to each person
should imitate Jesus and be unique, personalized, and loving.
4. What is our primary responsibility as participants in God's
mission? [5.10]
Our primary responsibility is simply to go and share the gospel.
The results are not up to us. As we go, we must prepare spiritually,
intellectually, and emotionally, but ultimately, we follow the Spirit's
lead and trust him to work through us. Whatever role we play in a
person's spiritual journey, we simply get in on what God is already
doing in that person's life.
HARVEST BIBLE STUDY
Students will analyze Bible
1. Have students work independently or
verses related to spiritual
with a partner to complete Harvest Bible
harvests.
Study.
2. Invite students to share their answers with
the class. Refer to the Harvest Bible Study
• Materials needed: Bible,
Answer Key.
and pen
20-25 minutes
CHAPTER 5 | 91


<!-- page-9 (book p.5) -->

CH
5.9-5.10
Also, available as TR 5.5
Harvest Bible Study
Answers.
HARVEST BIBLE STUDY ANSWERS
1. Read Ephesians 2:8-9. Who is responsible for our
salvation?
God is responsible. It is not the work of human beings
but the gift of God, by grace, through faith.
2. Read 1 Corinthians 3:5-9. What does this passage say
that people do? What does it say that God does?
This passage says that people are fellow workers with
God and servants who plant and water. It says that
God owns the field, gives the growth, and rewards us
for our labor.
3. Read Luke 8:4-15. What is sown?
Jesus says that what is sown is the Word of God.
4. Read Matthew 9:35-39. What motivated Jesus to
speak to his disciples about the harvest? What did he
tell the disciples to do?
Jesus spoke to his disciples because of his
compassion for the crowds of people who needed
him. He told his disciples to pray for more harvest
workers.
5. What did Jesus tell his disciples to do in Matthew
28:18-20?
He told them to disciple nations, baptizing them in
the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit,
and teaching them to do what he had commanded.
6. What does Galatians 6:9 say about the harvest? What
does it tell us to do?
It says that a harvest will come in due season and
that we should not give up or grow tired of
doing good.
7. In view of the Scriptures you read, how might you
approach the tasks of planting, watering, and reaping?
Lesson 6:
Videos P
Students will view four videos
featuring Christian educators and
authors in this lesson. Each expert
answers a specific worldview or
apologetics question. These videos
will allow students to expand their
knowledge and provide biblical
answers to thought-provoking
questions. The following videos
will be used in today's lesson:
1. Is Evangelism Only for
Extroverts? (Shlemon, 2:23)
2. Effective Apologetics without
Being an Expert (Sharp, 1:31)
3. Is Conversion Our
Responsibility?
(Shlemon, 1:30)
4. How To: Share Your Faith
(Koukl, 6:55)
Play the videos one at a time in
the order listed above. Before
each video, direct students to
read the questions associated
with that video in their student
manual so they know what to
listen for. Students should write
their answers to the Discussion
Questions during and after the
video has been shown. It may be
necessary to play the video again
so students can answer all the
questions. Go over the questions
for the first video. Play the next
video. Continue in this manner
until the last video has been
played and questions have been
discussed.
92 | CHAPTER 5
VIDEO DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
• Video 1:
Is Evangelism Only for Extroverts?
1. The speaker says that evangelism is not just for extroverts.
Why?
Not everyone is gifted to do evangelism yet everyone is responsible
for engaging in evangelism. The Bible tells us to always be prepared
to give a reason for the hope that is within us.
2. What example does the speaker give from his own life?
The speaker says that he has the gift of teaching, so he often does
public teaching of large groups. If you are not gifted in teaching, you
do not need to teach large groups.
3. The speaker says we do not have to be street preachers. What
job title does he say believers have?
The speaker says Christians are ambassadors for Christ, called to
proclaim the message of reconciliation, which is the gospel.
• Video 2:
Effective Apologetics without Being an Expert
1. What is necessary for talking to another person about faith?
It's necessary to be interested in the person by engaging in
conversation. Ask what he or she believes. Then, listen carefully,
intending to understand and learn.
2. What can you do after asking people what they believe and
why they believe it?
Find common points of interest where you have knowledge and can
contribute to the discussion. A conversation is more interesting and
effective when both participate.
• Video 3:
Is Conversion Our Responsibility?
1. Who is responsible for the results of our evangelism, according
to the speaker?
People are 100 percent responsible for their part. God is 100 percent
responsible for his part.
2. What responsibility do people have in evangelism?
We are responsible for proclaiming the gospel to all people-
whenever we have the opportunity—in a persuasive, clear, and
gracious manner.
3. What is God's responsibility?
The Holy Spirit, who is God, is responsible for convicting people of
sin and calling people to repentance.
CHAPTER 5| 93


<!-- page-10 (book p.5) -->

CH
Videos
• Video 4:
How To: Share Your Faith
1. Why does the speaker talk about making a difference for Christ in a
secular community, avoiding the word evangelism?
The speaker does this because the word evangelism brings a lot of ideas to mind.
2. Regarding tactics, what does the speaker say he never has as a goal?
The speaker says that when he has a conversation on spiritual matters with
someone, he never has it as a goal to lead that person to Christ.
3. Why does the speaker not have that goal?
The speaker says he does not have that goal because he doesn't know where that
person is in terms of knowledge and processing information about God.
4. What does the speaker mean when he says he tries to "do a little spade
work"?
He means he tries to give the other person something to consider regarding
Christ or some ethical issue.
5. What is the frame of mind the speaker recommends people have for doing
evangelism?
He recommends that people think about doing small things. When more people
do small things like gardening, preparing the soil, or planting a seed, this will
result in a better harvest.
6. What is the first step in talking to others about faith?
Gather information. Ask questions like "What do you mean by that?" Have
people make statements to explain their point of view. Find out how they came
to hold their positions.
7. Why is gathering information important?
Most non-Christians have not thought deeply about the slogans they repeat.
So, they have some ambiguities in their beliefs. This is your opportunity to ask,
"What do you mean by that?"
8. What does asking for more information encourage the person to do?
This encourages the person to clarify his or her beliefs without relying on slogans
and to think about things that he or she has probably not thought deeply about
before your conversation.
9. What is the speaker's final exhortation?
The speaker says we will be amazed at what God will do if we just focus on
gardening.
Lesson 7:
and
Review P
How They Got Ready in
their student manual. Read
the directions. Display PS 5.7
Chapter 5 Review to help
students review the concepts in
Chapter 5. Allow students to
discuss chapter concepts, take
notes, and use TR 5.SG Chapter
5 Study Guide.
CHAPTER 5 REVIEW
Key Terms
spiritual warfare
philosophy
the world
receptiveness
flourishing
Key Verses
2 Timothy 1:7
John 14:26
1 Peter 3:15
Ephesians 6:12
John 4:34-38
Empowered
to Love
94 | CHAPTER 5
APOLOGETICS G
HOW THEY GOT READY
Students will research how various missionaries prepared
for ministry.
• Materials needed: computer, paper, and pen
• Time required: 25-30 minutes
1. Divide the class into eight groups. Assign each group
one of the names of the missionaries listed below.
• Masayoshi Oshikawa
• Maria Fearing
• Eric Liddell
• Ida Sophia Scudder
• Clarence Wesley Jones
• Elizabeth Greene
• Nicolaus Adriani
• Lillian Hunt Trasher
2. Have groups research how their missionary prepared
to reach a specific people group or population. Direct
groups to identify the spiritual, intellectual, and
emotional preparation the missionary had or obtained
for his or her ministry.
3. Have each group present its findings to the class.
CHAPTER 5 | 95


<!-- page-11 (book p.5) -->

CH
Chapter 5
Test P
Distribute TR 5.8 Chapter 5 Test to each student and allow time
for them to complete the exercises. Students who finish early may
start reading Chapter 6. Assign the homework.
Notes
96 | CHAPTER 5
Logic and Love
