# Chapter 6

<!-- page-1 (book p.5) -->

CH
Chapter 5
Test P
Distribute TR 5.8 Chapter 5 Test to each student and allow time
for them to complete the exercises. Students who finish early may
start reading Chapter 6. Assign the homework.
Notes
96 | CHAPTER 5


<!-- page-2 (book p.99) -->

Chapter 6 Syllabus
Lesson
REVIEW
WATCH
REVIEW FOR
GIVE
Additional/alternate content
STUDY FOR
Assignment
Chapter 5 Test
Questions for Chapter 6.1-6.2
Activity: Deductive or Inductive?
Chapter 6.3-6.4
Questions for Chapter 6.3-6.4
Questions for Chapter 6.3-6.4
Activity: Critical Thinkers in Action
Chapter 6.5-6.6
Questions for Chapter 6.5-6.6
Questions for Chapter 6.5-6.6
Activity: Knowing Fallacies
Chapter 6.7-6.8
Questions for Chapter 6.7-6.8
Questions for Chapter 6.7-6.8
Activity: Dialoging and Listening Well
Chapter 6.9-6.10
Questions for Chapter 6.9-6.10
Questions for Chapter 6.9-6.10
Activity: Analyzing Alice
Videos
Video Questions
Video Questions
Activity: Q and A
Chapter 7.1-7.2
Questions for Chapter 7.1-7.2
Activity: Organizing Concepts
Study Guide Questions
Student Textbook (ST) Student Manual (SM)
Page
ST 91-94
SM 109
ST 94-97
SM 111
ST 97-100
SM 113
ST 100-103
SM 115-116
SM 117-119
110-112
ST 104-107
SM 124
PS 6.A, TR 6.A
TR 6.SG
Chapter 6
OVERVIEW
How can we navigate life and discern
truth from error in a world where truth
has become relative? Conversations and
debates are often wracked with confusion
caused by faulty reasoning and logical
missteps. Many arguments for and against
Christianity bypass reason, appealing instead
to our likes, weaknesses, prejudices, or
desires. Thankfully, God has given us the
gift of reason. By learning to reason well,
we can grow in our capacity to make sound
arguments, think critically, spot logical
errors, and ask good questions.
Logic is the study of orderly thinking
and the principles of reasoning. Using logic
helps us distinguish between solid and weak
reasoning. Logic also helps us formulate
valid and sound arguments. Arguments
are derived in two ways: deductively and
inductively. In a deductive argument, the
conclusion is deduced from the premises.
In an inductive argument, the conclusion is
inferred from the premises.
Flawed arguments are not always easy
to detect. Critical thinking is the process of
analyzing and evaluating information for
validity and soundness. It is a necessity in
determining the credibility of an argument.
In addition to flawed arguments, we
must be aware of faulty reasoning. In logic, a
faulty argument is called a fallacy, a mistake
in reasoning that renders an argument
invalid, unsound, weak, or ineffective.
Whether the use of fallacious arguments
is intentional or not, we must be able to
identify them in conversations, particularly
apologetic ones.
Finally, it is essential that we are wise
and loving listeners. Asking questions shows
people that you are genuinely interested in
them and care about what they have to say.
Questions can be beneficial when you have
identified a flaw in someone else's argument.
PREPARATION P
Lesson 1:
Make one copy of TR 6.1
Deductive or Inductive? Answer
key for yourself.
Lesson 3:
Make one copy of TR 6.3 Knowing
Fallacies onto card stock. Cut
out the 30 cards, and laminate if
possible. Mix the cards but keep
the fallacy cards separate from the
description cards. Place cards in a
plastic bag and use instructions in
the lesson to assemble for class.
Lesson 6:
Access and preview the five videos
listed on Lesson 6. See the inside
back cover of this manual for
video-streaming instructions.
Lesson 7:
Preview PS 6.7 Q and A to become
familiar with the activity.
Make one copy of TR 6.8 Chapter 6
Test for each student.
LESSON MATERIALS
Presentation Slides
PS 6.7 Q and A
PS 6.7 Chapter 6 Review
PS 6.A Organizing Concepts
Teacher Resources
TR 6.1 Deductive or Inductive?
TR 6.3 Knowing Fallacies
TR 6.SG Chapter 6 Study Guide
TR 6.8 Chapter 6 Test
TR 6.A Organizing Concepts
CHAPTER 6 |


<!-- page-3 -->

CH
Lesson 1:
6.1-6.2 P
Review Chapter 5 Test. Have
students turn to page 87 in
their student textbook. Read the
objectives to the class. Go over
the answers to the Discussion
Questions for Chapter 6.1-6.2 on
page 106 in the student manual.
Deductive or Inductive? Have
a copy of TR 6.1 Deductive or
Inductive? Answer Key available.
Read the directions. Assign
the homework.
• Students will be able to defend
the importance of reasoning
well. [6.1]
support the need for logic and
discern the difference between
deductive and inductive
arguments. [6.2]
* Have students read the article
Critical Thinking: The
Secret Weapon of Confident
Christians, in the online
Teacher Resources.
1. In Alice's Adventures in Wonderland, the Cheshire Cat
argues that it is mad (insane). Is the Cheshire Cat's argument
convincing to you? Explain. [6.1]
2. How is reason a helpful gift? [6.1]
Reason is one of God's most precious gifts. It helps us navigate and
make sense of the world. It is a vital tool for discovering truth and
avoiding error. Used well, reason helps us make better arguments,
detect poor arguments, think critically, ask helpful questions, and
show love for God and others.
3. What is the law of noncontradiction? Give an example that is
not used in your textbook to illustrate this law. [6.2]
The law of noncontradiction states that a proposition cannot be both
true and not true at the same time and in the same sense. Examples
will vary but should reflect the law of noncontradiction.
4. What is the difference between a valid argument and a sound
argument? [6.2]
A valid argument is properly formed—the conclusion must
follow from the premises. Either of the premises may be false, but
the argument still has a valid form if the conclusion follows. An
argument is sound if it has a valid form and both the premises are
5. Explain why the Cheshire Cat's argument about being mad is
invalid. [6.2]
The Cheshire Car's argument is invalid because the conclusion ("I
am mad") does not follow the two premises the cat gave. There
could be many other reasons why a cat might growl when pleased
and wag its tail when angry. The cat could be eccentric, contrary,
bored, or intentionally trying to confuse. The behavior in itself does
not constitute madness.
DEDUCTIVE OR INDUCTIVE?
Students will determine
1. Have students work with a partner. Review the
whether examples of
difference between a deductive argument and an
arguments are deductive or
inductive argument. Explain that the conclusion is
inductive.
deduced from the premises in a deductive argument.
Deductive arguments take general principles and
• Materials needed: TR 6.1
and pen
• Time required:
15-20 minutes
draw specific conclusions. In an inductive argument,
the conclusion is inferred from the premises.
Inductive arguments take specific instances and use
them to form general principles.
2. Have students turn in the student manual to the
activity Deductive or Inductive? Read the directions
4) Deductive or Inductive?
and allow partners a few minutes to complete
the exercise.
3. Go over the answers using the TR 6.1 Deductive or
Inductive? Answer Key. Have partners tally their
correct answers.
4. If time remains, challenge students to write their own
deductive and inductive arguments.
CHAPTER 6 | 101


<!-- page-4 -->

CH
Lesson 2:
6.3-6.4
Questions for Chapter 6.3-6.4.
Critical Thinkers in Action in
their student manual. Read the
directions. Assign the homework.
• Students will be able to explain
four practices essential to
critical thinking. [6.3]
© Students will be able to
critique three fallacies: ad
hominem, tu quoque, and the
straw man argument. [6.4]
• Have students read the article
Critical Thinking, by Summit
staff in the online Teacher
Resources.
102 | CHAPTER 6
1. What is the difference between an argument and an assertion?
[6.3]
An argument is a set of premises supporting a conclusion. An
assertion is a confident statement of belief that is unsupported by
reasons.
2. Why is it so important to use words carefully in arguments?
[6.3]
Possible answer: Words have tremendous power. They have the
potential to do great good or great harm. They can lead to greater
understanding and cooperation or create confusion and division.
Words mean different things to different people at various times and
places. For these reasons, we must be careful how we use words.
3. What is sophistry, and why might someone use it? [6.4]
Sophistry is the practice of intentionally using fallacious arguments
to deceive someone. Because the human heart is corrupted by sin,
a person may use sophistry because he or she is greedy or lustful,
wants power or fame to control or influence others, or desires to be
malicious. (
4. Explain what the following fallacies are:
Ad hominem: the fallacy in this argument is that someone attacks
the character or motivations of the arguer instead of the actual
argument.
Tu quoque: in this fallacy, the arguer defends his or her own error
by pointing out a similar error in the opponent
Straw man: in this type of fallacy, the arguer distorts an opponent's
argument, so it is easier to attack.
5. Why is it important to weigh the sources on which arguments
are built?
It is important to investigate sources because we need to know if the
facts or statements being used are correct. If someone makes a claim
using false information, their claim is invalid.
CRITICAL THINKERS IN ACTION
Students will demonstrate
characteristics and topics
textbook, paper, and pen
associated with good critical
thinking skills.
1. Divide the class into three groups. Explain that each group will create a two- or three-
minute skit that incorporates the topics or characteristics assigned to them. The skits
are to be situational, not just defining or explaining what the topic or characteristic
is. Students may use Chapter 6.3 in their textbook as a reference. Assign the topics as
designated below:
•Group 1: the difference between argument and assertion and the characteristics of
being clear and accurate
•Group 2: attentive listening and the characteristics of being relevant and consistent
•Group 3: the characteristics of being complete, fair, and courageous
2. Allow about 8 minutes for groups to formulate a plan for their skit. Each group
should include all the members in the skit and clearly act out the concepts in running
dialogue.
3. Invite a group to perform their skit. Ask students observing the skit to identify points
in the dialogue where the topics or characteristics were demonstrated. Each observer
who correctly connects the conversation to a topic or characteristic gets a point. Keep
track of points on the board.
4. Continue this until all three groups have performed their skits. Award students who
earned points with a special privilege such as a no-homework pass.
CHAPTER 6 | 103


<!-- page-5 -->

CH
Lesson 3:
6.5-6.6 P
Before class, use masking tape
to attach the cards from TR 6.3
Knowing Fallacies to the board
upside down with the blank side
showing so you can flip the cards
up to read them and flip them
back down again. Make six rows.
Put the fallacy cards in the top
three rows and the description
cards in the bottom three rows.
Questions for Chapter 6.5-6.6.
Knowing Fallacies in their
student manual. Read the
directions. Play the game. Assign
the homework
identify the fallacies in six
types of arguments. [6.5]
distinguish the fallacies in six
other types of arguments. [6.6]
* nomina Fallacies
Generalitation
Scare Tactics
Appeal to Pity
1. Consider the six types of fallacies discussed in Chapter 6.5.
Have you ever had a conversation with someone who used one
of those fallacies? Explain the type of fallacy it was and how you
responded. [6.5]
Answers will vary but should include one of the following fallacies:
scare tactic, slippery slope, false dilemma, red herring, circular
argument, or weak analogy.
2. Have you ever found yourself using or being tempted to use
one of the types of fallacies from Chapter 6.5: Explain what
happened. [6.5]
3. Have you ever experienced someone using any of the fallacious
arguments listed in Chapter 6.6? Which one? How did it make
you feel? If not, explain how you think one of those arguments
used against you would make you feel. [6.6]
Answers will vary but should include one of the following: appeal
to pity, appeal to irrelevant authority, argument from silence,
bandwagon, loaded words, or hasty generalization.
KNOWING FALLACIES
Students will correlate the
• Materials needed: TR 6.3, card
names of 15 fallacies to their
stock, and masking tape
descriptions.
1. Divide the class into two teams and have each team sit together. Point out the cards
from TR 6.3 Knowing Fallacies that are taped to the board. Explain that students will
play a type of memory game. The top three rows have cards with the name of a fallacy.
The bottom three rows have a description of a fallacy. The object of the game is to
match as many fallacies to their descriptions as possible.
2. Invite a student from one team to choose one card from the top three rows and one
card from the bottom three rows. Flip up both cards and have that same student read
them. Allow the team to decide if the description matches the fallacy.
Answers, for your information only: if the numbers on the top left side of each
card are the same, then they are a match. Remove the cards and give that team a
point. If they don't match, flip the cards back down. No points are awarded.
3. Repeat the process with the other team, giving them a point if their cards match.
Remember to remove cards if they are a match. Each team only gets one turn at a time
whether they win the point or not.
4. Continue in this manner until all the cards have been matched. The team with the most
points wins.
CHAPTER 6 | 105


<!-- page-6 (book p.6) -->

CH
Lesson 4:
6.7-6.8
Questions for Chapter 6.7-6.8.
Dialoging and Listening Well
in their student manual. Read the
directions. Assign the homework.
demonstrate five ways to
improve their listening skills.
[6.7]
employ five types of questions
to enhance conversation with
people who have different
beliefs than their own. [6.8]
106 CHAPTER 6
1. What does Scripture have to say about how to listen well? [6.7]
The following listening principles may be gleaned from Scripture:
•Listen for understanding before expressing your opinion (Proverbs
18:2).
• Listen to the question before trying to answer it (Proverbs 18:13).
•Be "quick to hear" and "slow to speak" (James 1:19).
•Take time to listen even when its inconvenient (Mark 5:21-34).
•Show genuine interest in what other people have to say (Luke
24:13-24).
2. Of the five practices listed for communicating attention in
Chapter 6.7, which do you find the most challenging? How could
you work on that? [6.7]
3. Why is the question "What do you mean by
?" SO
important in conversation? [6.8]
Many conversations are derailed because words, which can mean
different things to different people, are not clearly defined. You
may have an idea about the meaning of a particular word in your
mind, but if your conversation partner does not share it, there will
be confusion. Asking, "What do you mean by -
helps clarify the way that words are being used so that unnecessary
confusion can be eliminated.
4. What does it mean for a Christian to be an imposer instead of
a proposer? [6.8]
An imposer forces his or her beliefs on another person, demanding
assent and condemning when the person will not give assent.
A proposer offers up a belief for consideration and evaluation.
Christians should propose the gospel, setting it out clearly for others
to investigate and ponder. They shouldn't try to force anyone to
accept it.
DIALOGUING AND LISTENING WELL
Students will demonstrate
and evaluate dialoguing and
textbook
listening skills.
• Time required: 25-30 minutes
1. Have students work in pairs to write a dialogue about the accuracy and reliability of
the Bible (see Chapter 2). One partner will assume the role of a non-Christian who is
skeptical about the Bible. The other student will play the role of a Christian.
2. The non-Christian will present questions, concerns, or beliefs about the Bible as
an unbeliever might. The Christian will use listening skills and respond using the
questions from Chapter 6.8.
3. Allow a few minutes for pairs to dialogue. Direct students to use the list below to
evaluate their conversation. Have the non-Christian check the skills and questions
used by the Christian. The Christian will also check the skills and questions he or she
used during the dialogue. Then have partners compare their lists and discuss.
4. If time allows, have partners switch roles.
CONVERSATIONAL SKILLS
a. Showed engagement in the conversation.
b. Used physical and verbal gestures of interest
c. Waited to speak
d. What do you mean by-
e. What leads you to believe that is true? or How did you
come to that conclusion?
f. What difference does that make in your life?
g. Can you say more about that? or Can you help me
understand?
h. Have you ever considered...?
CHAPTER6 | 107


<!-- page-7 (book p.6) -->

CH
Lesson 5:
6.9-6.10
Questions for Chapter 6.9-6.10.
Analyzing Alice in their student
manual. Read the directions.
Inform students they will need
to bring in a ruler for the Lesson
6 activity. (Optional) Assign TR
6.SG Chapter 6 Study Guide to
prepare for Chapter 6 Test.
OBJECTIVE
differentiate between
appropriate and inappropriate
ways to use Scripture in
apologetic encounters. [6.9]
ENRICHMENT ACTIVITY
* Use TR 6.A Activity:
Organizing Concepts in class
for an additional or alternate
class activity.
108 | CHAPTER 6
1. Why might a Christian not use Scripture in an apologetic
encounter? [6.9]
Possible answer: Scripture does not always speak to every topic. In
such cases, the apologist must look to God for help and use wisdom
(gleaned from close attention to God's ways in Scripture) to make
persuasive arguments.
2. How can a Christian use Scripture appropriately and lovingly
when sharing with others? [6.9]
Christians who use the Bible well in their encounters with others
will:
•Remember that God's Word is itself the sword that convicts, not a
bludgeon that can be used to silence others.
•Avoid quoting Scripture verses out of context as if doing so settles
the argument.
• Be honest about what verses do and do not say.
•Resist the temptation to use Scripture verses that do not support
their point, even if that means not referencing the Bible at all.
•Admit their limitations in understanding Scripture and be willing
to say when they don't know.
3. Why don't reason and logic always convince people of the
truth? [6.10]
Reason and logic don't always convince because human beings are
more than their brains. We have bodies and emotions which play
a significant role in our understanding of what is true. Sometimes,
we may be convinced in our minds, but our feelings or personal
experiences may cause us to doubt. The wise apologist must
acknowledge that reason and logic are often not enough to convince
people of the truth.
4. G. K. Chesterton said, "Thinking in isolation and with pride
ends in being an idiot. [Everyone] who will not have softening of
the heart must at last have softening of the brain." What do you
think this means? 6.10]
Chesterton knew that reason and logic are not enough. If, in our
thinking, we isolate ourselves from others, becoming cold and purely
rational while ignoring other crucial aspects of our humanity (such
as our relationships, bodies, emotions, and experiences), we will
become very foolish. If we refuse to soften our hearts toward others,
our brains will also become soft—our faculty of reason will be
distorted, and our thinking will become muddled.
ANALYZING ALICE
Students will analyze a
conversation from Alice's
Adventures in Wonderland for
textbook, paper, and pen
• Time required: 25-30 minutes
appropriate and inappropriate
communication skills.
1. Direct students to work with a partner and read Alice's conversation with the Queen on
pages 101-102 of the student textbook.
2. Explain that students are to analyze the conversation by identifying what Alice did well
and what she did poorly in how she communicated. Have students review the concepts
in Chapter 6 to help them with their analysis.
3. Have partners discuss the questions below and write their answers on a piece of paper.
Invite students to share their answers. Discuss any points included in the answer key
below that students may not have mentioned.
• Did Alice use any of the positive techniques discussed in Chapter 6?
Explain your answer.
Possible answers: Alice used reason, logic, and critical thinking. She was clear and
relevant in her responses.
• What things did Alice do that were inappropriate in her conversation with
the Queen?
Possible answers: Alice did not treat the Queen respectfully or engage wisely. It
didn't seem like she listened attentively or used her words carefully. Alice used a
couple of fallacies like ad hominem and loaded words. She didn't wait to speak or
forget about herself during the conversation. Alice did not ask any questions, and
she definitely didn't speak with love.
• How could Alice have done better with her conversation with the Queen?
Possible answers: Alice could have treated the Queen with respect. She could
have been patient, listened attentively, waited to speak, asked questions and
avoided using fallacies or inflammatory words.
CHAPTER 6 | 109


<!-- page-8 -->

CH
Lesson 6:
Videos P
In this lesson, students will
view five interviews of various
Christian educators and authors.
Each expert answers a specific
worldview or apologetics
question. These videos will allow
students to expand their
knowledge and provide biblical
answers to thought-provoking
questions. The following videos
will be used in today's lesson:
1. What Are Logical Fallacies?
(Gould, 2:17)
2. How Can Questions Guide
Conversations? (Koukl, 3:08)
3. What Is Anti-Intellectualism?
(Gould, 3:13)
4. What Is One of Christians'
Greatest Weaknesses? (Sherrard,
2:10)
5. How Do You Humbly
Evangelize? (Shlemon, 2:33)
Play the videos one at a time in
the order listed above. Before
each video, direct students to
read the questions associated
with that video in their student
manual so they know what to
listen for. Students should write
their answers to the Discussion
Questions during and after the
video has been shown. It may be
necessary to play the video again
so students can answer all the
questions. Go over the questions
for the first video. Play the next
video. Continue this way until
the last video has been played and
questions have been discussed.
110 | CHAPTER 6
VIDEO DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
• Video 1:
What Are Logical Fallacies?
1. What has God called us to do?
We are to love God with all our mind.
2. What does the answer in Question 1 mean?
We are to be good thinkers.
3. What are logical fallacies?
Logical fallacies are mistakes in our thinking processes.
4. Why should we care about logical fallacies?
We should care about them because we should care about thinking
well and because we want to be rightly related to reality. To be
rightly related to reality means to think about reality rightly.
• Video 2:
How Can Questions Guide Conversations?
1. What is a great way to navigate through conversations?
Asking questions is an excellent way to navigate through
conversations.
2. Explain the concept of tactics in relation to conversations.
Tactics refers to how you maneuver in conversations with other
people.
3. What is key to a tactical approach?
Asking questions is key to maneuvering a conversation effectively.
4. According to the speaker, what are the three advantages of
asking questions?
First, asking questions shows good manners, is friendly, and helps
you gather information. Second, you never have to directly say what
your view is. Third, you can make a point, give your opinion, and
make your own case by using questions.
• Video 3:
What Is Anti-Intellectualism?
1. What is Jesus saying when he tells us to love the Lord your God with all
our heart, all our soul, and all our mind?
Jesus is saying to love him with all the ways he has made you.
2. What do we suffer from in our culture today?
We suffer from anti-intellectualism. We don't want to use our minds.
3. Jesus was very intelligent. He used reason and
interactions with the religious leaders.
in his
4. What are the two books the speaker referred to?
The book of Scripture and the book of nature.
Video 4:
What Is One of Christians' Greatest Weaknesses?
1. What is perhaps Christians' greatest weakness when defending their faith?
Christians trust too much in their knowledge. We often think if we know the
right thing to say, somebody is going to be convinced and converted or change
his or her position.
2. What are most people doing when you are talking? Do you find yourself
doing that when someone else is talking?
Most people aren't listening to you. They are thinking of what to say next.
Answers will vary for the second question.
3. Is having the correct answer necessary?
Yes, but just having the correct answer is not sufficient.
4. What are the three components of healthy apologetics that the speaker
noted?
The three components are character, good conversations, and using your
knowledge wisely.
5. According to the speaker, what makes a good conversation?
The speaker said to be respectful and to listen to the person who is talking.
Listen with the goal of understanding both the person's position and why he or
she holds that position.
CHAPTER6 | 111


<!-- page-9 (book p.6) -->

CH
Videos
(continued)
• Video 5:
How Do You Humbly Evangelize?
1. The speaker gave three main points about being humble when
evangelizing. What was the first point he made?
The Bible commands us to be humble so we need to engage in humility.
2. Explain the speaker's second point about remaining humble when talking
to someone who is mistaken about Jesus.
Chances are that we were once mistaken about Jesus or at least about a certain
topic in the Bible. Remembering that we were mistaken helps us to be humble.
3. What was the speaker's third point about being humble when talking to
people about Jesus?
Every person is an image-bearer of God and has intrinsic value, even people who
are mistaken about Jesus. We shouldn't be condescending but instead realize that
we all have equal value.
Lesson 7:
and
Review P
Q and A in their student manual.
Read the directions.
Use PS 6.7 Q and A to lead
students through the activity.
Then, display PS 6.7 Chapter 6
Review to help students review
the concepts in Chapter 6. Allow
students to discuss chapter
concepts, take notes, and use TR
6.SG Chapter 6 Study Guide.
CHAPTER 6 REVIEW
Key Terms
logic
law of noncontradiction
argument
critical thinking
assertion
fallacy
Key Verses
Proverbs 18:13
James 1:19
Colossians 2:3
2 Timothy 2:15
Hebrews 4:12
Q AND A
Students will assess their knowledge of concepts from
Chapter 6.
• Materials needed: PS 6.7, paper, and pen
1. Inform students they will compete individually
against the rest of the class. Direct them to have a
piece of paper and a pen available. Have students
number their paper from 1-12.
2. Display slide 1 of PS 6.7 Q and A and read the
directions. Display slide 2. Read the question and
four answer options. Direct students to write the
letter of the answer they think is correct on their
paper. They will have 20 seconds to make their
decision.
3. Continue to display slides 3-12 one at a time. Have
student volunteers read the questions and answers.
Allow 20 seconds for students to write their answers
to each question.
4. Display the answer key on slide 13. Have students
correct their own papers or switch papers with
another student. Direct them to mark the correct
answers only, add them, write the total number at
the top of the paper, and circle it. The students)
with the most correct answers wins.
5. If any students are unsure why a question has a
specific answer, discuss the answer with the class.
choice questions.
• Read the question and answers on
- Write the letter of the correct answer
on your pape
• The person with the most correct
112 | CHAPTER 6
CHAPTER6 | 113


<!-- page-10 (book p.6) -->

CH
Chapter 6
Test P
Distribute TR 6.8 Chapter 6 Test to each student and allow time
for them to complete the exercises. Students who finish early may
start reading Chapter 7. Assign the homework.
Notes
What to Do
with Doubt
114 | CHAPTER 6
