# Chapter 7

<!-- page-1 (book p.6) -->

CH
Chapter 6
Test P
Distribute TR 6.8 Chapter 6 Test to each student and allow time
for them to complete the exercises. Students who finish early may
start reading Chapter 7. Assign the homework.
Notes
What to Do
with Doubt
114 | CHAPTER 6


<!-- page-2 -->

What to Do with Doubt
Chapter 7 Syllabus
Lesson
4 In Class
Additional/alternate content
REVIEW
WATCH
REVIEW FOR
GIVE
Assignment
Chapter 6 Test
Questions for Chapter 7.1-7.2
Activity: Aspects of Faith
Chapter 7.3-7.4
Questions for Chapter 7.3-7.4
Questions for Chapter 7.3-7.4
Activity: Examining Faith Survey
Chapter 7.5-7.6
Questions for Chapter 7.5-7.6
Questions for Chapter 7.5-7.6
Activity: Mountains and Deserts
Chapter 7.7-7.8
Questions for Chapter 7.7-7.8
Questions for Chapter 7.7-7.8
Activity: Doubt Mapping
Chapter 7.9-7.10
Questions for Chapter 7.9-7.10
Questions for Chapter 7.9-7.10
Activity: God's Promises Bible Study
Videos
Video Questions
Video Questions
Activity: Unquestioned Clichés
Chapter 8.1-8.2
Questions for Chapter 8.1-8.2
Activity: X, 0, Complete a Row
STUDY FOR
Study Guide Questions
Student Textbook (ST) Student Manual (SM)
116 | CHAPTER 7
Page
ST 107-110
SM 126
ST 110-113
SM 130
ST 113-115
SM 132
ST 116-119
SM 134
SM 139-141
128-129
ST 120-123
SM 146
PS 7.A, TR 7.A
TR 7.SG
Chapter 7
OVERVIEW
For Christians, the object of faith is
God. He is the one Christians trust in
and give allegiance to. Biblical faith has
five dimensions: spiritual, intellectual,
emotional, and physical, moral, and
practical. Stubborn unbelief, not doubt,
is the opposite of faith. Doubt is simply a
feeling of uncertainty that may fluctuate
according to circumstances. Doubt is not
the same thing as unbelief. All who have
not trusted in Jesus for salvation are in a
state of unbelief. Some may want to believe,
but struggle. Others engage in stubborn
unwillingness to accept the truth even when
it's clearly revealed.
Doubts can be a catalyst to asking
questions and building a strong faith
foundation. Doubt has many sources.
Cognitive dissonance, emotions, trauma,
intellectual doubts, practical atheism,
desire for sin, or negative experiences with
Christians may lead to doubt, questioning,
or even deconstruction. Deconstruction
is the dismantling of previously accepted
beliefs and may lead to the breakdown of
the entire system of belief. Deconstruction
is painful and those who are deconstructing
need to be treated with compassion.
Deconstruction doesn't have to lead to the
loss of faith. Reconstruction of one's faith on
a biblical foundation is possible.
When it comes to personal doubt, it's
important to remember that doubt can
lead to spiritual growth. Additionally, it's
important to: examine doubts to find their
source; pray about doubts; read Scripture;
doubt the doubts; and deal with doubts in
the company of wise, loving, compassionate,
and biblically grounded mentors. Christians
can come alongside those who are doubting
or deconstructing by being present with
them, listening, praying with them, and
sharing their pain.
PREPARATION P
Lesson 4:
Make one copy of TR 7.4 Doubt
Mapping.
Lesson 5:
Make one copy of TR 7.5 God's
Promises Bible Study Answer
Key for yourself.
Lesson 6:
Access and preview the six videos
listed on Lesson 6. See the inside
back cover of this manual for
instructions to stream videos.
Lesson 7:
Make one copy of TR 7.7
Unquestioned Clichés. Cut the
clichés into their five groups.
Make one copy of TR 7.8 Chapter 7
Test for each student.
LESSON MATERIALS
Presentation Slides
PS 7.7 Chapter 7 Review
PS 7.A X, 0, Complete a Row
Teacher Resources
TR 7.4 Doubt Mapping
TR 7.5 God's Promises Bible Study Answer Key
TR 7.7 Unquestioned Cliches
TR 7.SG Chapter 7 Study Guide
TR 7.8 Chapter 7 Test
TR 7.A X, O, Complete a Row*
*This TR activity is found on page 131.
CHAPTER7 | 117


<!-- page-3 -->

CH
Lesson 1:
7.1-7.2
Review Chapter 6 Test. Have
students turn to page 104 in
their student textbook. Read the
objectives to the class. Go over
the answers to the Discussion
Questions for Chapter 7.1-7.2 on
page 124 in the student manual.
Have students turn to Activity:
Aspects of Faith. Read the
directions. Assign the homework.
• Students will be able to
evaluate evidence that
experiencing doubt about
Christianity is normal. [7.1]
O Students will be able to
describe five dimensions of
biblical faith. [7.2]
• Have students read the article
Isn't Religion Based on
Faith? by Tim Keller, in the
online Teacher Resources.
118 | CHAPTER 7
1. How could it help to know that many Christians throughout
history have experienced doubt? [71]
Sometimes, when we doubt, we can feel lonely and isolated, but it
helps to remember that it is normal for a Christian to experience
doubt. Knowing that many Christians have experienced doubt and
come out the other side with their faith intact is comforting and
strengthening. The lives of other Christians throughout history
demonstrate that doubt is not the end of faith, and when we face
our doubts with God's help, our faith can grow stronger.
2. Describe the nature of faith. [7.2]
Faith is trust in and allegiance to someone or something. Christians
place their faith in Jesus. Faith is not dependent on our personal
strength. The Holy Spirit helps us. Our faith needs to be based on
knowledge and strengthened by our emotions. Faith affects not only
what we believe but how we behave. And it should make a difference
in every area of life, even the seemingly insignificant details.
3. Describe the intellectual and emotional aspects of faith. [7.2]
The intellectual component of faith includes having good reasons
to trust in Christ. It involves seeking knowledge and testing truth
claims. The emotional component involves our feelings—whether
we feel joyful and confident in the faith, or sad and unsettled. Either
way, the strength of our faith is not dependent on how we feel at any
given moment. It is dependent on Christ.
4. Is your faith characterized more by the intellectual or the
emotional component? [7.2]
5. In what ways does your faith make a difference in what you do
Monday through Saturday? [7.2]
ASPECTS OF FAITH
Students will correlate
1. Divide the class into five groups and assign each
Scripture passages to
group one of the following passages
the aspect of faith they
• Group 1: 1 Kings 19:1-9
demonstrate.
•Group 2: Matthew 4:18-22, Luke 9:57-62
• Group 3: Acts 1:1-3; Luke 24:15-16, 25-27
• Materials needed: Bible
10-15 minutes
• Group 4: Colossians 3:15-25
• Group 5: 1 Timothy 1:12-17
2. Review the five aspects of biblical faith: spiritual,
intellectual, emotional and physical, moral, practical.
3. Direct groups to analyze the passage(s) assigned
to their group to determine which one of the five
aspects of biblical faith is represented and how it is
represented. Have students complete the row for
their group in the chart in the student manual.
4. Have groups present their findings to the class. Guide
students to complete the chart in the student manual
as they participate in class discussion. Use the
answer key below:
ANSWER KEY:
•Group 1: 1 Kings 19:1-9
Answer: emotional and physical
•Group 2: Matthew 4:18-22, Luke 9:57-62
Answer: moral
• Group 3: Acts 1:1-3; Luke 24:15-16, 25-27
Answer: intellectual
• Group 4: Colossians 3:15-25
Answer: practical
• Group 5: 1 Timothy 1:12-17
Answer: spiritual
CHAPTER7 | 119


<!-- page-4 -->

CH
Lesson 2:
7.3-7.4
7.3-7.4. Have students turn
to Activity: Examining Faith
Survey in their student manual.
Read the directions. Assign the
homework.
O Students will be able to
differentiate between doubt
and unbelief. [7.3]
• Students will be able to explain
cognitive dissonance, faith
deconstruction, and faith
reconstruction. [7.4]
© Have students read the article
Deconstruction & the Road
Back Home by Christopher
L. Reese, in the online Teacher
120 | CHAPTER 7
1. What does Jesus' response to Thomas' doubt mean for us
today? [7.3]
Rather than rebuking him, Jesus revealed himself to Thomas and
gave him the evidence he sought. Jesus handled Thomas' doubt with
grace. Jesus is also patient with us in doubt. He does not condemn
us for our doubt but allows us to work through doubt in his
presence.
2. How is the unbelief of philosopher Thomas Nagel different
from the unbelief of the father in Mark 9:14-29? [7.3]
Thomas Nagel admitted that while he couldn't prove there was no
God, he hoped there was no God because he did not want to believe
in one. Nagel sought to avoid God at all costs. The father in Mark
9:14-29 wanted to believe in Jesus, but he simply felt too weak to
do so. He was struggling to believe, so he called on Jesus for help.
Nagel clung to stubborn unbelief, whereas the father in Mark 9
sought help overcoming his unbelief.
3. Is doubt the opposite of faith? Explain your answer. [7.3]
Doubt is not the opposite of faith. If handled well, doubt can be a
stimulus to growth in faith. The true opposite of faith is unbelief
that is characterized by a stubborn unwillingness to accept the truth
even when it is clearly revealed.
4. What are some reasons a person might deconstruct their faith?
[7.4]
A person might deconstruct their faith if cognitive dissonance goes
unresolved or if they encounter intellectual arguments against their
faith that they don't know how to answer. Past experiences of shame,
abuse, or hypocrisy among Christians may be a factor in faith
deconstruction. Some may deconstruct their faith if they come to
believe that the teachings of Christianity have a negative influence
on people or are inherently oppressive.
5. What does it mean to embrace questions as an opportunity for
God to work in you? [7.4]
To embrace the questioning process is not to dwell perpetually in
doubt. Healthy questioning involves being honest about your doubts
with God and others, diligently seeking answers to your questions,
and trusting that God can use this process to deepen your faith. For
someone considering deconstructing their faith, embracing questions
can be an opportunity for God to work toward reconstructing faith
on a stronger foundation. The Holy Spirit can guide a person to
enter a process of reassessing and rebuilding their deconstructed
beliefs with the purpose of strengthening their faith and discarding
false beliefs.
APOLOGETICS 5
EXAMINING FAITH SURVEY
Students will evaluate their
1. Direct students to work independently to complete
personal approach to faith
the Examining Faith Survey in the student manual.
and doubt.
Complete this survey privately and prayerfully.
2. Ask for student volunteers to discuss what they
• Materials needed: pen
15-20 minutes
learned about themself through this survey. Students
are not required to share their answers but may
voluntarily choose to do so.
EXAMINING FAITH SURVEY
1. On a scale of 1-10 (with 10 being most
often), how often do you experience
doubt about what you believe?
2. Are you experiencing cognitive
dissonance, either from holding two
conflicting beliefs or from living in a
way that contradicts your beliefs? If
yes, explain.
3. On a scale of 1-10 (with 10 being most
confident), how confident do you feel
that you have the resources you need
to deal with your doubts?
4. Do you tend to trust your heart or your
mind more? What are the strengths
and weaknesses of this tendency?
5. Are you primarily on a quest to pursue
the truth or to pursue personal
happiness?
6. Do you tend to see Christian faith as
good for every person and society or
just for some?
7. If the values taught in the Bible and in
your culture conflicted, which would
you be more likely to follow? Why?
8. Are you more likely to endlessly
question your beliefs or more likely
to reform your beliefs to match the
teachings of Scripture?
9. Are you willing to accept Jesus for all
he is revealed to be in the Bible, or do
you change your view of Jesus to fit
what you want to be true of him?
10. Do you take the whole Bible seriously
as God's authoritative Word or do you
pick and choose which parts you want
to believe?
11. On a scale of 1-10 (with 10 being
most willing), how willing are you to
intentionally engage with your faith in
the following ways?
• Spiritually
• Intellectually
• Emotionally and physically
• Morally
•Practically
12. What steps can you take right away to
engage more with your faith?
CHAPTER 7 | 121
S What to Do with Doubt


<!-- page-5 (book p.7) -->

CH
Lesson 3:
7.5-7.6
7.5-7.6. Have students turn to
Activity: Mountains and Deserts
in their student manual. Read the
directions. Assign the homework.
O Students will be able to discuss
the causes of intellectual
doubt. [7.5]
© Students will be able to analyze
how emotions can contribute
to doubt. [7.6]
© Have students read the article
Embracing Doubt as a Path
to Deeper Faith, from Stand
Strong Ministries in the online
Teacher Resources.
122 | CHAPTER 7
1. How can we respond if an argument for Christianity proves to
be faulty or inadequate? [7.5]
When an argument fails, we need to examine it carefully to
determine why it has failed. If it is still a good argument but has
been poorly explained or not put together soundly, we should make
every effort to revise it in the light of all available evidence. If the
argument is truly flawed, it should be abandoned so we can look to
other more robust arguments.
2. Does the discovery of a faulty argument mean Christianity is
false? [7.5]
No, the existence of a faulty argument does not mean Christianity
is untrue. Christianity is not dependent on one argument. An
argument may be poorly presented, outdated considering new
evidence, faulty at its core, and worth discarding in favor of better
arguments. This doesn't mean the cumulative case for Christianity is
at risk. It's important to examine all evidence carefully and to check
arguments that challenge Christianity, which can be faulty.
3. Have you ever experienced what felt like a spiritual high or
spiritual low in your relationship with Christ? Explain how this
affected your faith. [7.6]
4. What are some helpful ways to engage our physical bodies and
emotions when struggling with doubt? [7.6]
We can intentionally care for our physical bodies. This includes
choices like getting proper sleep, eating well, spending time
outdoors, exercising, and engaging in other creative activities. We
can engage our emotions by reading poetry or experiencing a good
story (through a book, movie, play, etc.). Listening to beautiful
music can be especially helpful. We can also seek out wise Christian
friends and mentors with whom we can discuss our feelings.
MOUNTAINS AND DESERTS
Students will analyze how
1. Have each student work with a partner. Assign each
emotions affected the
pair one of the following biblical figures. Each biblical
faith and doubts of biblical
figure may be assigned to more than one pair.
figures.
• David (Psalm 18:1-6, 16-19. Context note: This
psalm was written by David after King Saul tried to
kill him.)
• Materials needed: Bible
• Elijah (1 Kings 19:9-18. Context note: This event
occurred after Elijah's showdown with the
prophets of Baal at Mount Carmel.)
20-25 minutes
• Moses (Numbers 20:2-12)
• The Samaritan woman (John 4:7, 9, 13-14, 16-18,
25-26, 28-29)
• John the Baptist (Matthew 11:1-9)
• Peter (Luke 22:54-62, see also John 21:15-19 for
the ending.)
2. Direct each pair to analyze the passages associated
with their assigned biblical figure. Then, have
students complete the Mountains and Deserts
questions in their student manual.
3. Have pairs share their findings with the class.
MOUNTAINS AND DESERTS STUDY
1. What emotions do you think this biblical figure experienced? Does
this figure seem to experience a spiritual high or a spiritual low in
this passage?
2. What events or experiences may have contributed to this figure's
emotional and spiritual state?
3. Did this figure's emotional and spiritual state seem to cause any
doubts, questioning, or confusion?
4. How do you think you might respond in a similar circumstance?
What are some thoughts or practices that might help?
CHAPTER 7


<!-- page-6 (book p.7) -->

CH
Lesson 4:
7.7-7.8 P
7.7-7.8. Direct students to turn
to Activity: Doubt Mapping
in their student manual. Have a
copy of TR 7.4 Doubt Mapping
and Answer Keys available.
Read the directions. Assign the
homework.
• Students will be able to explain
how experiences and trauma
can create doubt. [7.7]
O Students will be able to express
how practical atheism and
sinful behavior can lead to
doubt. [7.8]
124 | CHAPTER 7
1. How can experiences, depression, and trauma lead to doubt?
17.7]
Our beliefs usually help us make sense of our experiences.
Sometimes, however, our beliefs may seem inadequate to explain
an experience. A traumatic or confusing experience may challenge
our beliefs, or they may seem unhelpful for dealing with emotional
pain. When any of these things happen, we may begin to question
our faith. Difficult experiences, depression, and trauma may leave
us feeling disoriented and vulnerable to doubts we might never
entertain otherwise.
2. How can practical atheism lead to doubt? [7.8]
Practical atheism is believing in God but living as if he doesn't
exist. Such a person may attend church regularly but allow God
little room in daily life. When God plays such a small role in our
existence, he begins to seem irrelevant and perhaps not worth
believing in at all.
3. How can personal sin lead to doubt? [7.8]
When we knowingly and regularly live contrary to God's ways, we
may doubt that God's ways are truly good or that God can help us
in our struggle against sin. We may even struggle with doubt because
we want to continue our sin without being bothered by God's moral
standards. Thankfully, when we find ourselves living in sin, we can
always turn to God in repentance and be graciously forgiven.
4. How can we respond to hypocrisy or scandals among
Christian leaders? [7.8]
The moral failures of high-profile leaders can shake people's
confidence in the truth and goodness of Christianity. We do not
excuse sinful behavior. We also confront the fact that our own sinful
choices may have the same effect. Christians are not perfect; no
person lives up to their beliefs and ideals perfectly, and the truth
of Christianity doesn't rest on how well people practice it. So, we
should not be surprised when Christians sometimes fall short.
DOUBT MAPPING
Students will infer factors
that may intensify or
alleviate specific types of
doubt.
• Materials needed: TR 7.4
20-25 minutes
1. Divide the class into four groups. Briefly review the
concepts of emotional, intellectual, experiential,
and practical doubt from Chapter 7.5-8 with the
class. There are four separate doubt maps and
answers keys in TR 7.4, one for each concept.
Distribute one doubt map from TR 7.4 Doubt
Mapping to each group. Inform students that each
group's doubt map focuses on a different type of
doubt: emotional, intellectual, experiential, or
practical doubt.
2. Have each group read the directions for their doubt
map. Direct them to complete the map and answer
the question. Have TR 7.4 Doubt Mapping Answer
Keys available.
3. Have groups present their findings to the class.
CHAPTER 7 | 125


<!-- page-7 (book p.7) -->

CH
Lesson 5:
7.9-7.10 P
Read the objective to the class.
7.9-7.10. Have students turn to
Activity: God's Promises Bible
Study in their student manual.
Have one copy of TR 7.5 God's
Promises Bible Study Answer
Key available for yourself. Read
the directions. Direct students to
complete the exercise. (Optional)
Assign TR 7.SG Chapter 7
Study Guide to help prepare for
Chapter 7 Test.
OBJECTIVE
• Students will be able to
demonstrate ways to deal with
doubt. [7.9]
126 | CHAPTER 7
1. What are some practical steps we can take when we experience
doubt? [7.9]
Answers may vary but should include some of the following: We can
choose not to be afraid of our doubts and remember that doubt can
be a catalyst for building a stronger faith foundation. We can doubt
our doubts, knowing that the assumptions or emotions behind our
doubts may have a shaky foundation. By examining our beliefs,
engaging our emotions in the pursuit of truth, talking to someone
about our experiences, or repenting of sin, we can move toward God
instead of letting our doubts pull us away from him. We can find
out where our doubt is coming from. We can talk to God about our
doubts and investigate Scripture for ourselves. We can find wise,
loving, compassionate, and faithful Christian friends and mentors to
accompany us through doubt.
2. What is the best way to help those who are experiencing doubt
or deconstruction? [7.9]
The best way is often just to be present with them, listen, pray with
them, share their pain, and sometimes just be silent. In so doing, we
acknowledge that Christ is the only one who can lead them to faith
despite doubts. By coming alongside those who are doubting, we can
help them process doubts within a safe Christian community. And,
if they are genuinely seeking answers to intellectual questions, we
can be willing to search for those answers with them.
3. What can Christians always be assured of, even when we
cannot satisfy all our doubts? [7.10]
Christians can rest assured that God never abandons us in our
doubts. He is always with us, and his grace and mercy are
always available.
GOD'S PROMISES BIBLE STUDY
Students will analyze
1. Have students open to God's Promises Bible Study
promises in God's Word
in the student manual. Guide them to read the
and consider how to apply
directions and use their Bible to complete the
them when they experience
exercises. Students may work in pairs.
doubt or challenges to their
2. Have the class discuss their answers. Use the
faith.
TR 7.5 God's Promises Bible Study Answer Key
to guide the discussion.
• Materials needed: TR 7.5,
Bible, and pen
30-35 minutes
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE
CHAPTER 7 | 127


<!-- page-8 (book p.7) -->

CH
Lesson 6:
Videos P
In this lesson, students will
view six interviews of various
Christian educators and authors.
Each expert answers a specific
worldview or apologetics
question. These videos will allow
students to expand their
knowledge and provide biblical
answers to thought-provoking
questions. The following videos
will be used in today's lesson:
1. What Is the Value of Emotion
in the Christian Life? (Bywater,
1:23)
2. Can Christians Suffer from
Depression? (Wilson, 3:40)
3. Jesus and Mental Health
(Galvan, 3:40)
4. How Should I Handle Doubt?
(Noyes, 1:44)
5. Hurt by the Church? (Noyes,
1:57
6. Can I Encourage Doubting
Friends? (Noyes, 1:50)
Play the videos one at a time in
the order listed above. Before
each video, direct students to
read the questions associated
with that video in their student
manual so they know what to
listen for. After the video has been
shown, students should write
their answers to the Discussion
Questions. It may be necessary to
play the video again so students
can answer all the questions.
Go over the questions for the
first video. Play the next video.
Continue in this manner until
the last video has been played and
questions have been discussed.
| CHAPTER 7
• video 1:
What Is the Value of Emotion in the Christian Life?
1. Why do Christians sometimes downplay emotion?
We sometimes downplay emotion because we think it's something
wholly unrelated to truth.
2. What two "-isms" related to emotion do Christians need to
avoid?
Christians need to avoid both emotionalism and rationalism.
3. How do we need to treat our emotions?
We need to accept that our emotions are part of bearing God's
image, and we need to discipline our emotions.
•
Video 2:
Can Christians Suffer from Depression?
1. Can a Christian be depressed?
Yes, a Christian can be depressed. A depressed Christian is hurting,
not necessarily sinning.
2. What are the only necessary things to conquer evil and
suffering?
The necessary things are the blood of the Lamb and the word of our
testimony.
3. How did the speaker grow in his faith in the midst of
depression?
He wrote down identity statements describing who he is in Christ.
Video 3:
Jesus and Mental Health
1. How did Jesus care for his mental health?
Jesus pulled away from the crowds to rest and get peace. He spent
time with friends. He went on walks and served others.
2. What are two of the most important ways we can care for our
mental health?
Two of the most important ways are to serve others and express
gratitude.
3. What is one of the most helpful factors for young people
struggling with mental health?
One of the most important factors is a connection to a trusted,
supportive adult.
Video 4:
How Should I Handle Doubt?
1. Is it all right for Christians to doubt?
Yes. It's okay to genuinely doubt because of something pressing into you that
you cant answer.
2. What is the speaker's advice for someone who is doubting?
Know that it's okay to doubt and find someone to confide in.
3. How can Christians walk alongside those who doubt?
Help them find answers. This might mean researching and wrestling with issues
yourself.
• video 5:
Hurt by the Church?
1. What is important to remember when we have been hurt by other
Christians?
Sin has influenced everything and everyone, including us. We're not only the
victims but also the victimizers.
2. How can we deal with hurt from other Christians?
Be honest about it. Go to them, give them the benefit of the doubt, and provide
them with the opportunity to explain themselves.
Video 6:
Can I Encourage Doubting Friends?
1. Complete the saying: "Doubter don't want
dogma
2. What is the first thing to remember when caring for those who doubt?
Every person has an immortal soul and is made in God's image. They are of
infinite value and worth, no matter what they believe about God.
3. How does the speaker like to reach those who doubt?
He likes to be in a relationship with them, answer their questions, get to know
them, and ask them many questions.
CHAPTER 7 | 129


<!-- page-9 (book p.7) -->

CH
Lesson 7:
and
Review P
Have students turn to Activity:
Unquestioned Clichés in their
student manual. Have scenarios
from TR 7.7 Unquestioned
Clichés separated and available.
Display PS 7.7 Chapter 7
Review to help students review
the concepts in Chapter 7. Allow
students to discuss chapter
concepts, take notes, and use
TR 7.SG Chapter 7 Study
Guide.
CHAPTER 7 REVIEW
Key Terms
faith
doubt
cognitive dissonance
faith deconstruction
faith reconstruction
practical atheism
Key Verses
Mark 9:23-24
John 20:29
Hebrews 11:1
Jude 1:22
What to Do with Doubt
130 | CHAPTER 7
UNQUESTIONED CLICHES
Students will formulate responses to unquestioned
clichés commonly used by Christians.
• Materials needed: TR 7.7, scissors, Bible, and pen
• Time required: 20-25 minutes
1. Divide the class into five groups. Distribute one
unquestioned cliché from TR 7.7 Unquestioned
Clichés to each group.t
2. Direct groups to read their assigned scenario,
noting further information and corresponding
Bible verses. Have them discuss how the cliché
used in the scenario could confuse someone
who is already doubting the Christian faith or
how it could encourage practical atheism. Direct
them to then formulate a gracious response to
the person or people in the scenario.
3. Have each group briefly present their scenario
and response to the class. Answers will vary.
Slogans and additional information in TR 7.8A have been adapted from Jeff
Myers, Unquestioned Answers: Rethinking Ten Christian Cliches to Rediscover
Biblical Truth, Jeff Myers (Colorado Springs, CO: David C Cook, 2020,
33-47, 81-111, 129-159.
Enrichment
TR7A P
Preview PS 7.A X, O, Complete
a Row to become familiar with
the activity. Make one copy of TR
7.A Complete a Row Tracker for
every two students. Cut out the
row trackers.
Enrichment Activities are
available for each chapter. This
activity is included here for your
convenience and as a reminder
that the Enrichment Activities are
available for each chapter in the
online Teacher Resources.
Intructions:
You in treat arable answer and guerion.
OX.0, Complete a Row
X,O, COMPLETE A ROW
Students will distinguish the best usage of key terms
and concepts surrounding doubt and faith.
• Materials needed: PS 7.A, TR 7.A, index cards, markers,
timer, and pen
• Time required: 45-50 minutes
1. Give each student two pieces of index cards and a
marker. Have each student write an X on the first
index card and an 0 on the second index card.
Display slide 1 on PS 7.A X, 0, Complete a Row and
read the directions to the class.
2. Distribute one row tracker from TR 7.A Complete
a Row Tracker to each student. Explain that for
every correct answer, students will place a check
mark next to the question designator. For example,
Question 3 is designated as Q3 on the score sheet.
3. Display slide 2 and read the first question. Give
students twenty seconds to decide and indicate
their answers by raising their index card(s). Display
slide 3 to reveal the correct answer. Read the answer
to the class and direct students with the correct
answer to place a check mark in the box next to Q1.
Use slides 4-49 to continue in the same manner
until all questions have been completed.
4. Complete the questions in the slide presentation,
and then have students calculate scores. Direct
students to check how many in-a-rows have been
completed in the top section of their row tracker.
In-a-rows can be completed across (for example,
Q1-Q13) or down (for example, Q1-Q4). Then have
students check how many in-a-rows have been
completed in the lower section of the score tracker.
Direct students to total their number of completed
in-a-rows. Have students share their number of
completed in-a-rows.
CHAPTER 7 | 131


<!-- page-10 (book p.7) -->

CH
Chapter 7
Test P
Distribute TR 7.8 Chapter 7 Test to each student and allow time
for them to complete the exercises. Students who finish early may
start reading Chapter 8. Assign the homework.
Notes
132 | CHAPTER 7
Truth and Tolerance
