# Chapter 8

<!-- page-1 (book p.7) -->

CH
Chapter 7
Test P
Distribute TR 7.8 Chapter 7 Test to each student and allow time
for them to complete the exercises. Students who finish early may
start reading Chapter 8. Assign the homework.
Notes
132 | CHAPTER 7


<!-- page-2 -->

Chapter 8 Syllabus
Lesson
4 In Class
REVIEW
WATCH
REVIEW FOR
GIVE
Assignment
Chapter 7 Test
Questions for Chapter 8.1-8.2
Activity: Sort Truth Claims
Chapter 8.3-8.4
Questions for Chapter 8.3-8.4
Questions for Chapter 8.3-8.4
Activity: Two Truths and a Lie
Chapter 8.5-8.6
Questions for Chapter 8.5-8.6
Questions for Chapter 8.5-8.6
Activity: Response to Postmodernism
Chapter 8.7-8.8
Questions for Chapter 8.7-8.8
Questions for Chapter 8.7-8.8
Activity: Answering Slogans
Chapter 8.9-8.10
Questions for Chapter 8.9-8.10
Questions for Chapter 8.9-8.10
Activity: Scripture Posters
Videos
Video Questions
Video Questions
Activity: Tolerance Assessment
Chapter 9.1-9.2
Questions for Chapter 9.1-9.2
Additional/alternate content
Activity: Christian View of Truth Bible Study
STUDY FOR
Study Guide Questions
Student Textbook (ST) Student Manual (SM)
134 | CHAPTER 8
Page
ST 123-126
SM 148-149
138-139
ST 126-129
SM 150-151
ST 129-132
SM 152-153
ST 133-136
SM 154
SM 156-158
146-148
ST 137-140
SM 166
PS 8.A, TR 8.A
TR.SG
Chapter 8
OVERVIEW
Humans have long discussed the definition
and meaning of truth. Christians believe
truth is knowable, and God created us
to know truth. People with competing
worldviews have other ideas. A belief counts
as knowledge if it is justified and true,
corresponding to reality. Therefore, we must
distinguish between objective and subjective
truth. Objective truth is true for all people,
at all times, and in all places; subjective
truth is not.
Knowledge involves risk. It often
requires that we commit to one or more
beliefs that cannot be proven with absolute
certainty. Such beliefs form our plausibility
structure and tell us what is reasonable or
possible. A Christian view of truth begins
with God and the belief that he made the
universe intelligible and that he reveals truth
through general and special revelation.
Modernism affirms that truth is found
through reason and science. It mistakenly
classifies all religious truths as subjective
and all scientific knowledge as objective.
Postmodernism rejects this idea, arguing
that truth cannot be known and reality is
just a matter of perspective. Relativism is the
belief that truth, knowledge, and morality
are relative to the individual, society, or
historical context.
Christians affirm the value of reason and
science while affirming the need for faith
the need for faith. We recognize that our
context, culture, and presuppositions affect
our views, but we hold to the truth of the
Christian metanarrative. Though diverse
beliefs exist, we declare they are not equally
true. Tolerance requires us to respect the
dignity of those with whom we disagree.
Jesus commands us not to judge others and
to love our enemies. We are in a spiritual
battle, so we pursue truth and share it with
others to show that the Christian faith is
true and meaningful.
© Truth and Tolerance
PREDARATION P
Lesson 1:
Print a copy of TR 8.1 Truth Claims
list for yourself. Print one copy of
the Answer Key for yourself.
Lesson 4:
Print a copy of TR 8.4 Answering
Slogans Answer Key for yourself.
Lesson 5:
Obtain poster board and art
supplies for tour groups.
Lesson 6:
Access and preview the videos
listed on Lesson 6. See the inside
back cover of this manual for
video-streaming instructions.
Print a copy of TR 8.8 Chapter
8 Test for each student. Print
one copy of the Answer Key for
yourself.
LESSON MATERIALS
Presentation Slides
PS 8.8 Chapter 8 Review
PS 8.A Christian View of Truth Bible Study
Teacher Resources
TR 8.1 Truth Claims
TR 8.4 Answering Slogans Answer Key
TR 8.SG Chapter 8 Study Guide
TR 8.8 Chapter 8 Test
TR 8.A Christian View of Truth*
*This TR activity is found on page 151.
CHAPTER 8 | 135


<!-- page-3 (book p.8) -->

CH
Lesson 1:
8.1-8.2 P
Review Chapter 7 Test. Have
students turn to page 120 in
the student textbook. Read the
objectives to the class. Go over
the answers to the Discussion
Questions for Chapter 8.1-8.2
on page 146 in the student
manual. Retrieve your copy of
TR 8.1 Truth Claims and have
students turn to Activity: Sort
Truth Claims. Have the Answer
Key available as needed. Read the
describe Christian and non-
Christian claims about truth.
[8.1]
© Students will be able to
differentiate between objective
and subjective truth claims.
[8.2]
© Have students listen to
the The Case for Truth, by
J. Warner Wallace, Summit
Podcast episode 69, in the
136 | CHAPTER 8
1. How would you personally answer Pilate's question, "What is
truth?" [8.1]
Answers will vary.
2. What are some things that Christians believe about truth?
[8.1]
Possible answers:
•It is possible to know truth.
• We were made to discover truth in relationship with God.
•Ultimate truth is found in Jesus, and this truth sets us free.
• The truth about Jesus applies to all people in every time and place.
3. Is a belief automatically true if it is justified (supported by
reasons): [8.2]
Not necessarily. Having good reasons for your belief is certainly
important, but for your belief to count as truth, it must correspond
with the way the world actually is. It must correspond with reality.
4. What is the difference between an objective truth claim and a
subjective truth claim? [8.2]
An objective truth claim is a claim regarding an independent fact
about the world. It is a claim that applies to all people in all times
and places, regardless of how anyone feels about it. A subjective
truth claim, on the other hand, is a claim regarding a dependent
fact about a subject (the person making the claim). Subjective truth
claims deal with matters of individual preference and taste, and do
not apply to all people in all times and places.
SORT TRUTH CLAIMS
Students will categorize
1. Distribute a copy of TR 8.1 Truth Claims List to each
specific statements as
student.
objective truth claims,
2. Have students read the directions, and explain that
subjective truth claims,
students will work with a partner to complete as
or a combination.
many exercises as time allows.
• Materials needed: TR 8.1
• Time required: 10-15
minutes
3. Students will state whether a statement or part of a
statement, is an objective truth claim, a subjective
one, or both, and whether each claim is true, false,
or unknown. Note that exercises 11-20 are more
challenging than exercises 1-10.
4. If time allows, call on selected pairs to explain their
answer to a specific exercise. Use the answer key as
students discuss their answers with the class.
CHAPTER 8 | 137


<!-- page-4 (book p.8) -->

CH
Lesson 2:
8.3-8.4
Read the objectives to the class.
Go over the Discussion Questions
for Chapter 8.3-8.4. Have
students turn to Activity: Two
Truths and a Lie in the student
manual. Read the directions.
Assign the homework.
• Students will be able to discuss
plausibility structures and the
relationship of trust and risk to
knowledge. [8.3]
summarize a Christian
view of truth, including an
explanation of general and
special revelation. [8.4]
138 CHAPTER 8
1. Why does all knowing require risk? [8.3]
Human beings are finite. Our knowledge is limited, so we must
choose what to believe based on the best information we have. We
cannot achieve absolute certainty.
2. Define the term plausibility structure and explain how a
plausibility structure helps you interpret the statement that pigs
can fly. [8.3]
A plausibility structure is a view of the world that determines what is
reasonable or possible. Most people would reject the statement that
pigs can fly because, in their plausibility structure, animals without
wings stay on the ground, and pigs don't have wings. Besides, no one
has ever observed flying behavior among pigs. If your plausibility
structure does not allow for flying pigs, you might dismiss the idea
that pigs can fly as a joke or think that the person making this claim
is irrational.
3. Can we trust what we know even though we cannot have
absolute certainty? Explain. [8.3]
We can trust what we know even when we lack absolute certainty.
Our God-given powers of reason and investigation allow us to try
to justify our beliefs by examining the reasons and evidence for or
against them. We cannot eliminate the need for trust, so we need to
be humble in our claims of knowledge. However, we can and should
seek to justify our beliefs in the same way we would seek to justify
anything else.
4. Use the four tests in Chapter 8.4 to evaluate the claim that
God is the Creator. [8.4]
Possible answers:
•The test of reason: Most scientists believe the universe began at
a specific point in time. So, it makes sense there must have been
someone or something to set the universe in motion. The idea that
this someone was God is a reasonable explanation.
•The test of the outer world. The universes complexity, order, and
apparent design suggests there must be a designer.
•The test of the inner world. Each of us has a conscience that helps
us determine right from wrong. This makes sense if we were created
in God's image.
•The test of the real world. The belief that God is the Creator
gives humans inherent dignity and fills the universe with meaning,
purpose, and the possibility of joy.
5. What is general revelation, and what does it point to? [8.4]
General revelation is God's universal revelation about himself
and morality from nature and our conscience. The universe's
order, beauty, and complexity suggest truths about its Designer. God has also
revealed the truth about morality by inscribing a sense of right and wrong on
each person's conscience. All human cultures share at least some general moral
guidelines.
6. What is special revelation, and why do we need it? [8.4]
Special revelation is God's unique revelation about himself through Jesus
Christ, the Holy Spirit, the Scriptures, and miraculous events. We need special
revelation because our knowledge about God and what he desires is limited.
Without special revelation, we would not know that human beings are made
in God's image and loved. Without special revelation, we would also lack the
knowledge necessary for salvation.
TWO TRUTHS AND A LIE
Students will examine
1. Have students work in groups of three or four. Explain
plausibility and assess
that each person in the group must select two true
the truth or falsehood
statements from the chapter and then formulate
of specific statements.
a third statement that is false but related to the
two true statements. Direct students to write three
statements on their paper but not indicate which
• Materials needed: paper
statement is false.
and pen
2. When students in each group have finished writing
their three statements, have each person in the
15-20 minutes
group present their three statements-two true, one
false-to the group. Group members discuss if the
statements are plausible or implausible, and then
guess which statement is false. The presenter then
reveals if the false statement was correctly identified.
3. Continue until all group members' statements have
been discussed.
CHAPTER 8 | 139


<!-- page-5 (book p.8) -->

CH
Lesson 3:
8.5-8.6
Read the objectives to the
class. Go over the Discussion
Questions for Chapter 8.5-8.6.
Have students turn to Activity:
Response to Postmodernism
in the student manual. Read the
• Students will be able to explain
the rise of modernism and its
view of truth. [8.5]
• Students will be able to
contrast modernism with
postmodernism. [8.6]
© Have students read the article
The Parable of the Mad Man,
by Friedrich Nietzsche in the
1. What did René Descartes mean when he said, "I think,
therefore I am"? [8.5]
Descartes believed that the human power of reason was the one
thing we could be sure of. Because we think, we must exist in some
way. Descartes surmised that human reason was the foundation for
all knowledge, and the surest source for discovering what is true.
2. In what ways is a modernist view of truth similar to the
Christian view of truth? How are they different? [8.5]
Modernists believe that human reason and science are the primary
tools we use to discover what is true. Christians also affirm the value
of reason and science for discovering truth. Christians believe that
reason and science are God-given gifts that enable us to explore
God's world. Christians, however, acknowledge the limits of what
we can know through science and reason, holding that general and
special revelation are also necessary. Modernists reject the possibility
of learning truth from divine revelation.
3. How does a modernist view of truth deal with values, morals,
and religious beliefs? [8.5]
For a modernist, values, morals, and religious beliefs cannot be
objectively true for all people, so they are relegated to the upper
story and made more or less irrelevant. Unlike scientific knowledge,
which is objective, rational, and verifiable, religious beliefs are
considered subjective, nonrational, and nonverifiable. Everyone can
decide what is true regarding terms of values, morals, and religious
beliefs. However, they should keep their beliefs private, because their
beliefs are merely preferences.
4. What did Friedrich Nietzsche mean when he said, "God is
dead"? [8.5]
Nietzsche did not mean that God had once literally existed and that
we had physically killed him. Rather, for Nietzsche, God was merely
an idea that had given the universe stability, but was no longer
necessary. The supposed ability of humans to remake the world
through reason and science had rendered God unnecessary.
5. What historical factors led to the rise of postmodernism? [8.6]
Horrific events in the 20th century-such as World Wars I and II,
the Armenian genocide, the Holocaust, Mao's Cultural Revolution,
and the Cambodian genocide-led to pessimism about humanity's
ability to create a paradise through reason, science, and technology.
Postmodernists latched onto this pessimism and came to believe
that modernism was just as incapable of revealing truth as divine
revelation.
RESPONSE TO POSTMODERNISM
Students will compose
1. Direct students to compose a written response with
a written response to a
at least 150 words to be completed during class or
postmodern worldview.
extended as homework. (Option: For an extended
assignment, increase the word count to 300 words
or as needed for the learning needs of your students
• Materials needed: student
and indicate a completion date.)
textbook, Bible, paper,
2. Students may choose to write on one of the two
and pen
topics below:
• a response to the "Parable of a Madman" excerpt
by Friedrich Nietzsche found in the student
textbook
• a description of the postmodern view of truth in
their own words
3. Student responses can be creative or straightforward.
They may write it as an essay or as a parable, a poem,
an epistle, an epitaph, or a prayer. The responses
must mention God's death and include three ideas
or arguments. Students may use their textbook and
Bible as needed.
4. Instruct students on your expectations of their final
written response.
CHAPTER 8 | 141
5 Truth and Tolerance


<!-- page-6 (book p.8) -->

CH
Lesson 4:
8.7-8.8 P
Read the objectives to the
class. Go over the Discussion
Questions for Chapter 8.7-8.8.
Refer to your copy of TR 8.4A
Answering Slogans Answer
Key and have students turn to
Activity: Answering Slogans in
the student manual. Read the
summarize relativism and how
it influences popular views of
truth. [8.7]
• Students will be able
to compose a Christian
worldview response to
modernist, postmodernist, and
relativist views of truth. [8.8]
1. What is individual relativism? Give examples of it today. [8.7]
Individual relativism says that truth and morality are entirely up
to each individual. Examples offered by students will vary but may
include:
•People altering their gender, and believing gender is just a social
construct.
•People unwilling to criticize or judge any action (no matter how
evil it might be), or believing that right and wrong are up to each
person.
2. What is cultural relativism? Give examples of it today. [8.7]
Cultural relativism says that one's culture determines what is true
and moral. Examples offered by students will vary but may include:
•People saying that all religions are true for those who practice them
•People being unwilling to critique harmful cultural practices for
fear of being called racist or imperialistic
• People seeing evangelism as an attempt to eliminate diversity and
obliterate others cultures
3. How might Christians respond to modernism? [8.8]
Christians can acknowledge with modernists that reason and science
help us discover truth—but reason and science only lead to partial
knowledge. For example, science can explain how things work,
but cannot tell us their purpose or meaning. Religion helps us
understand purpose and meaning vital for human flourishing. So,
limiting the scope of knowledge to only what science can reveal is
foolish.
4. How might Christians respond to postmodernism? [8.8]
Christians can acknowledge, along with postmodernists, the need for
humility about the limits of human knowledge and the importance
of considering how our culture, context, and presuppositions affect
how we see truth. However, we deny postmodernism's conclusion
that we can't truly know anything; humans can know truth with a
reasonable degree of confidence. Postmodernism is self-defeating,
because it puts forth its metanarrative about the world while
simultaneously declaring no metanarrative is true.
5. How might Christians respond to relativism? [8.7]
People who claim to be relativists are not relativists about everything
(for example, they affirm that relativism is true). In contrast,
Christians maintain that some views are true and correct, and others
are false and wrong. By saying everything is relative to the individual
or culture, relativists argue that no one has the right to say someone
else's ideas or actions are wrong. But standing by or remaining silent in
the face of evil goes against the intuitive moral sense of most people.
ANSWERING SLOGANS
Students will formulate
1. Have students work in five groups. Assign each
Christian responses to
group one of the slogans listed below:
popular relativist slogans.
•Group 1: "Who are you to judge others?"
• Group 2: "That's just your opinion."
• Materials needed: TR 8.4,
student textbook, Bible,
paper, and pen
• Group 3: "All religions are basically the same."
•Group 4: "If you grew up in Iran, you would be a
Muslim."
•Group 5: "Saying Jesus is the only way to heaven
is exclusive and discounts other religions."
2. Have each group discuss and formulate responses
on how Christians may best respond to its slogan,
using Scripture references and information from the
chapter to support their responses.
3. Have a spokesperson from each group present the
group's findings to the class. Use TR 8.4 Answering
Slogans Answer Key to evaluate the answers
provided.
CHAPTER 8 | 143


<!-- page-7 (book p.8) -->

CH
Lesson 5:
8.9-8.10
Read the objective to the class.
Go over the Discussion Questions
for Chapter 8.9-8.10. Gather the
poster board and art supplies and
have students turn to Activity:
Scripture Posters in the student
manual. Read the directions.
Assign the homework. (Optional)
Assign TR 8.SG Chapter 8
Study Guide to help prepare for
Chapter 8 Test.
OBJECTIVE
• Students will be able to express
what tolerance is and how to
practice it. [8.9]
144 | CHAPTER 8
1. How does the modern definition of tolerance differ from
the traditional definition? [8.9]
The modern definition of tolerance states that all views are
equally true for those who hold them, and we have no business
saying otherwise. Traditional tolerance acknowledges that real
disagreements exist between people but affirms respect for the
dignity of those with whom we disagree.
2. How does the Christian view of tolerance go beyond the
traditional definition of tolerance? [8.9]
The Christian view of tolerance goes beyond the classic definition in
at least three ways:
•First, we are to judge right and wrong, but beware of hypocrisy.
We examine ourselves, acknowledge our faults, and repent of those
faults before pointing out faults in others.
•Second, we need to remember that we are in a spiritual battle. So,
we don't fight with worldly weapons like slander or cruel speech.
Instead, we act in accordance with the fruit of the Holy Spirit.
• Third, we are to do more than merely tolerate those we disagree
with. We are to love them with self-sacrificial love.
3. What did Jesus mean when he said, "Judge not, that you be
not judged"? [8.9]
Answers will vary but may include that because God designed
every human being to be unique, the way we approach each person
should imitate Jesus and be unique, personalized, and loving. We
also remember that we will be judged in the same way we judge
others. We are not to be hypocritical. Instead, we are to be humble,
recognizing the depth of depravity within ourselves before pointing
out our brother's small faults.
4. How can we help people see that Christianity is not only true,
but also meaningful and fulfilling? [8.10]
Answers will vary. One way is to find out what a person really wants,
then consider how the biblical story speaks to that person's desires
and offers meaning and purpose for this life and the hereafter. Also,
we can show that Christianity is meaningful by living in a way that
attracts others to the gospel, demonstrating the love of Jesus in
tangible ways that make a difference in people's lives.
SCRIPTURE POSTERS
Students will illustrate
1. Divide the class into four groups. Assign each
Bible verses to demonstrate
group a verse or passage:
their understanding of the
• Group 1: Matthew 7:1-2
concepts of tolerance and
• Group 2: Luke 6:35-36
Christian character.
• Group 3: Galatians 5:24-26
• Group 4: Ephesians 6:12
• Materials needed: Bible,
poster board, and art
supplies
2. Provide each group poster board and art supplies.
Explain that groups are to illustrate the passage
they received. Allow time for groups to create
their poster.
3. Have groups bring their posters to the front of
the class so that all students can see the posters.
If time allows, discuss the activity.
CHAPTER 8 | 145


<!-- page-8 (book p.8) -->

CH
Lesson 6:
Videos P
In this lesson, students will view
four or five videos featuring
Christian educators and authors.
Each expert answers a specific
worldview or apologetics
question. These videos will
allow students to expand their
knowledge and provide biblical
answers to thought-provoking
questions. The following videos
will be used in today's lesson:
1. What's a Christian View of
Truth? (Almon, 3:12)
2. Christianity: Truth and
Relationship? (Almon, 2:24)
3. Can Religious Claims Be True?
(Noyes, 1:35)
4. What Are Historical Views
about Truth? (Gould, 0:54)
5. What Do People Mean by
"Tolerance"? (Shlemon, 3:17)
Play the videos one at a time in
the order listed above. Before each
video, direct students to read the
questions associated with that
video in their student manual
so they know what to listen for.
During and after the video has
been shown, students should write
their answers to the Discussion
Questions. It may be necessary to
play the video again so students
can answer all the questions.
Go over the questions for the
first video. Play the next video.
Continue in this manner until
the last video has been played and
questions have been discussed.
•video 1:
What's a Christian View of Truth?
1. What does the speaker say is a Christian view of truth, and
what is it based on?
She says that the simplest way to explain the Christian view of truth
is a person. In John 14:6, Jesus said, "I am the way, the truth, and
the life."
2. What is significant about the Greek words ego eimi?
The words can be translated as "I, I AM," as though Jesus were
stuttering, but they refer to the divine name "I AM" that God
revealed to Moses at the burning bush.
3. What does philosophy teach about truth?
It teaches the correspondence theory of truth: something is true if it
corresponds to how the world is.
4. Why is knowing the truth important?
Jesus said that knowing the truth would set us free. It also helps us
navigate the world. God made the world a certain way, and knowing
this helps us understand how to live in it.
5. What problems come with people being free to believe
whatever they want?
Problems come when our beliefs don't fit with reality.
6. What does understanding the truth do for us?
Understanding what the truth really is helps us to live better lives
and to flourish to the fullest.
• Video 2:
Christianity: Truth and Relationship?
1. Why is it important to combine truth and relationship?
It is important because it better reflects God to the world around us.
2. How does this relate to the Trinity and how God made us?
The speaker says that God exists in community in three Persons and
one essence as the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit. God made
us in his image for relationship.
3. What does God's nature and ours tell us about truth?
Truth is deeply personal because of how God is and how he made us.
4. What examples does the speaker give for how we know truth is deeply
personal?
The speaker says that the first thing newborns look for is faces. She adds that
God walked with Adam in the garden. He also took on flesh and came to dwell
with us in the person of Jesus.
5. What happens when we treat other people as God's image-bearers?
We gain community when we treat others as God's image-bearers. Being in
relationship with one another, we are able to be ourselves and become more
deeply human.
Video 3:
Can Religious Claims Be True?
1. As an atheist, how did the speaker view all religions?
He believed that all religions were false.
2. What did he not understand about his treatment of religious claims at
that time?
He had not realized that he held religious claims to a different standard than all
other claims about truth.
3. How did the speaker relate objective and subjective truth to religion?
He believed all religious claims were subjective rather than objective truth, and
he did not consider whether his claim that all religious were false was subjective,
rather than objective.
• Video 4:
What Do People Mean by "Tolerance"?
1. How does culture today define the word tolerance?
Culture today equates tolerance with agreement. If you agree with someone, you
are tolerant. If you do not agree, you are intolerant.
2. What is the true definition of tolerance?
Tolerance is respecting someone's beliefs and practices without sharing them, or
putting up with something or someone not necessarily liked.
3. How does the true definition of tolerance relate to culture's definition of
tolerance?
with it.
It is the exact opposite. In order to tolerate something, you have to disagree
4. How does the speaker argue that Christians are the most tolerant people
in our culture?
The speaker says that Christians have principled reasons for the objections they
hold to others' beliefs and practices, yet they treat those individuals with respect
and can be credited with the virtue of tolerance.
5 Truth and Tolerance
CHAPTER 8 | 147


<!-- page-9 -->

CH
Videos
(continued)
5. How should Christians respond to those who label them intolerant?
Christians should try to educate them, explaining the true definition of
tolerance.
• Video 5:
What Does Loving Others Look Like?
1. Where does the speaker say commandments to love others are found in
the Bible?
The speaker says that Scripture is full of such commandments and references. He
also points to 1 Corinthians 13.
2. What example from Jesus' parables does the speaker give regarding how
to love others?
The speaker gives the example of the Good Samaritan. Through this story,
Jesus shows us that love requires giving of oneself for the care, comfort, and
restoration of others.
3. What does the speaker say that love requires?
He says that love requires putting others first and being willing to give up or
own desires and comforts for others' sake, and even to lay down our life for
others.
4. What does the parable of the sheep and the goats teach us?
In loving others, not only are we serving, helping, and bringing hope to others,
but expressing love to Jesus himself.
5. How does the speaker say we should apply this truth in our day-to-day
practice?
He says we need to think about the needs of those around us and how we might
meet those needs. By doing practical things to meet those needs, we show love to
others and to Jesus.
Lesson 7:
and
Review
Have students turn to Activity:
Tolerance Assessment in the
student manual. Read the
directions. Display PS 8.7
Chapter 8 Review to help
students review the chapter.
Allow students to discuss chapter
concepts, take notes, and use TR
8.SG Chapter 8 Study Guide.
CHAPTER 8 REVIEW
Key Terms
knowledge
objective truth claim
subjective truth claim
plausibility structure
modernism
postmodernism
relativism
tolerance
Key Verses
John 18:37-38
John 14:6
John 16:13
Matthew 7:1
Luke 6:35-36
148 | CHAPTER 8
TOLERANCE ASSESSMENT
Students will assess their own beliefs and experiences
of tolerance.
• Materials needed: pen or pencil
• Time required: 15-20 minutes
1. Discuss how tolerance is the willingness to
recognize and respect the dignity of those with
whom one disagrees and recognize that people may
disagree. As Christians, we are expected to live in
peace with others (Romans 12:18). We must not only
value humans, made in God's image, but treat them
the way we would like to be treated (Genesis 1:27,
Matthew 7:12).
2. In preparation for handling situations where
tolerance is necessary have students complete
the Tolerance Assessment. Encourage students to
make a mark or write notes by any question where
they particularly desire personal growth. Allow
time for students to meditate on their answers
and determine whether he or she needs to make
any changes in personal behavior or thinking, with
God's help. Allow students to share their if they
choose to do so in class discussion.
CHAPTER 8 | 149


<!-- page-10 (book p.8) -->

CH
(continued)
TOLERANCE ASSESSMENT
Answers will vary.
1. When have people been intolerant toward me? What
happened? Why?
2. Are there situations where I could have better
communicated my difference of opinion?
3. What could I have done differently?
4. In the future, how might I interact with someone who is
being intolerant toward me?
5. What makes me intolerant toward others?
6. Are there specific topics or situations that make me
impatient and irritable?
7. How do I react when I receive negative feedback?
8. How do I respond when someone effectively critiques an
argument I made?
9. What do I tend to do when I am being intolerant?
10. How can I improve my tolerance?
11. What words remind me to be tolerant or describe tolerant
behavior?
12. When did I have to be tolerant with someone who
disagreed with me?
13. What helped me to treat that person with dignity and
respect?
14. Is it hard for me to befriend those who are different from
me or disagree with me? Explain
15. What are the benefits of interacting with people who
don't think the same way I do?
16. Do I avoid situations where disagreements might surface?
Explain.
17. Is there a risk in tolerating those who hold different views
than I do? If so, what is the risk?
Enrichment
TR 8.A
Use PS 8.A Christian View of
Truth to lead students through
the activity.
Enrichment activities are
available for each chapter. This
activity is included here for your
convenience and as a reminder
that the enrichment activities are
available for each chapter in the
150 | CHAPTER 8
© Truth and Tolerance
CHRISTIAN VIEW OF TRUTH
Students will discuss what Christianity teaches
about truth.
• Materials needed: PS 8.A and Bible
• Time required: 30-40 minutes
1. Display PS 8.A Christian View of Truth. Read slide 1.
Have a student read the slide aloud. Then, ask the
class to respond to the question following the chart.
2. Display slides 2-3. Read the slides and have
students take turns looking up the Bible references.
Discuss the questions.
3. Display and read slides 4-6. When a bullet point
includes Bible verses, have students take turns
looking up the references and reading the verse or
verses aloud. After each set of Scriptures, ask for a
volunteer to summarize the passages in their own
words, as if they were sharing them with a friend.
4. Display slide 7. Have students turn to a partner
and take turns sharing their answer to the last
two questions.
5. If time allows, conclude the activity with prayer.
CHAPTER 8 15_


<!-- page-11 (book p.8) -->

CH
Chapter 8
Test P
Distribute TR 8.8 Chapter 8 Test to each student and allow time
for them to complete the exercises. Students who finish early may
start reading Chapter 9. Assign the homework.
Notes
Religion Roundup
X
152 | CHAPTER 8
