# Chapter 10

<!-- page-1 (book p.9) -->

CH
Chapter 9
Test P
Distribute TR 9.8 Chapter 9 Test to each student and allow time
for them to complete the exercises. Students who finish early may
start reading Chapter 10. Assign the homework.
Notes
Questioning
Religion
170 | CHAPTER 9


<!-- page-2 -->

Questioning Religion
Chapter 10 Syllabus
Lesson
REVIEW
REVIEW FOR
GIVE
Additional/alternate content
WATCH
STUDY FOR
Assignment
Chapter 9 Test
Questions for Chapter 10.1-10.2
Activity: Individualism
Chapter 10.3-10.4
Questions for Chapter 10.3-10.4
Questions for Chapter 10.3-10.4
Activity: Analyzing Misconception #2
Chapter 10.5-10.6
Questions for Chapter 10.5-10.6
Questions for Chapter 10.5-10.6
Activity: Misconception Pros
Chapter 10.7-10.8
Questions for Chapter 10.7-10.8
Questions for Chapter 10.7-10.8
Activity: Misconception Cons
Chapter 10.9-10.10
Questions for Chapter 10.9-10.10
Questions for Chapter 10.9-10.10
Activity: Debate Practice
Activity: Debating Misconceptions
Activity: How Would You Respond?
Chapter 11.1-11.2
Questions for Chapter 11.1-11.2
Videos
Video Questions
Study Guide Questions
Student Textbook (ST) Student Manual (SM)
172 | CHAPTER 10
Page
174-175
ST 158-160
SM 188
ST 161-163
SM 191
ST 164-166
SM 193
ST 166-170
SM 195
ST 171-175
SM 202
TR 10.A
TR 10.SG
Chapter 10
OVERVIEW
Since the 1990s, the number of people who
do not affliate with any particular religion
has been rising rapidly. These people are
known as the nones and fall into one of
three different groups: atheists, agnostics,
and those who say they are "nothing in
particular." The growth of secularism,
humanism (particularly secular humanism,
and individualism-worldviews that often
disregard the need for religion—contribute
to the growth of the nones.
Another possibility that could be
a contributing factor to the growth of
the nones is the significant amount of
misinformation about God and religion,
called misconceptions. This chapter covers
eight misconceptions: religion is a fairy tale;
I don't have religious experiences, so God
isn't real; religion is unnecessary because of
science; religious instruction is a form of
indoctrination; religion will interfere with
my freedom; religion promotes prejudice,
violence, and the subjugation of women; I
don't need God or religion to find meaning
in life; and I don't need God or religion to
be moral.
Some Christians consider Christianity
more about relationships and less as a
religion. However, this isn't completely
accurate. A religion is a specific system
of beliefs, worship, or conduct that
prescribes responses to the sacred, divine,
or supernatural. Christianity definitely
is a religion. Because God created us to
be in relationship with him, ourselves,
others, and creation, Christianity is
also about relationships. A better way
to explain Christianity is to say it is a
religion, the heart of which is relationships.
God designed humans to relate to him
through prayer, reading the Bible, worship,
fellowship, acts of service, and stewardship.
PREPARATION P
Lesson 2:
Preview PS 10.2 Misconception
Answers to become familiar with
the activity.
Lesson 3:
Make a copy of TR 10.3 Pros and
Cons for each student. Computers
will be needed.
Lesson 4:
Computers will be needed in
lessons 3,4, and 5. Students will
need their copies of TR 10.3.
Lesson 5:
Computers and TR 10.3 needed.
Preview PS 10.5 Debate Rubric.
Lesson 6:
Arrange classroom furnishings for
the debate. Make two copies of
TR 10.6 Debate Evaluation for
each student. Students will need
TR 10.3. Review PS 10.6 Debate
Details to become familiar with the
activity.
Note:
Videos and discussion usually
scheduled for Lesson 6 are
available as an optional activity.
Make one copy TR 10.A Ch 10
Video Discussion Questions for
each student.
Lesson 7:
Make a copy of TR 10.7 How
Would You Respond? for yourself.
Print a copy of TR 10.8 Chapter 10
Test for each student.
LESSON MATERIALS
Presentation Slides
PS 10.2 Misconception Answers
PS 10.5 Debate Rubric
PS 10.6 Debate Details
PS 10.7 Chapter 10 Review
Teacher Resources
TR 10.3 Pros and Cons
TR 10.6 Debate Evaluation
TR 10.7 How Would You Respond?
TR 10.SG Study Guide Questions
TR 10.8 Chapter 10 Test
TR 10.A Chapter 10 Video Discussion Questions
CHAPTER 10 | 173


<!-- page-3 (book p.10) -->

CH
Lesson 1:
10.1-10.2
Review Chapter 9 Test. Have
students turn to page 154 in
their student textbook. Read the
objectives to the class. Go over
the answers to the Discussion
Questions for Chapter 10.1-10.2
on page 186 in the student
manual. Have students turn to
Activity: Individualism. Assign
the homework.
Note: The activities for
Lessons 2-5 prepare students for
a class-wide debate scheduled
for Lesson 6. The videos for this
chapter are available in TR 10.A
Chapter 10 Video Discussion
Questions.
O Students will be able to
categorize a people group
known as the nones into three
subgroups according to their
religious beliefs. [10.1]
• Students will be able to
distinguish between three
nonreligious worldviews:
secularism, humanism, and
individualism. [10.2]
© Have students read the
article Separating Secular
Humanism and the State, by
Chuck Edwards, in the online
Teacher Resources.
174 | CHAPTER 10
1. What are the three types of atheistic beliefs listed in Chapter
10.1? Why do you think it is important to distinguish between
these types of beliefs? [10.1]
Some atheists reject God's existence because they cannot reconcile
God with the amount of suffering and evil in the world. Others
reject God because they believe he is evil or simply imaginary.
Practical atheists believe in God but live as if he doesn't exist. New
atheists are often antagonistic toward God because they think
religions are a significant source of the world's evils. It is essential to
distinguish the different types because it gives us understanding and
empathy. If we know why someone is an atheist, we can accurately
speak to their objections.
2. What does it mean to be agnostic? [10.1]
To be agnostic is to believe the existence of God or gods is either
unknowable or unprovable. Agnostics remain undecided about the
question of God's existence. Some believe we can only know what
science can prove. Because science can't decide the question of God's
existence, agnostics remain undecided. Other agnostics have more
of a postmodern leaning. They do not believe we can know ultimate
truth, so they don't consider the question of God's existence.
3. How would you describe those who claim to be "nothing in
particular"? [10.1]
Those who describe themselves as "nothing in particular" don't have
strong religious beliefs. For them, the question of God's existence is
not particularly important. They may or may not be affiliated with a
religion, but either way, religion does not make much difference in
their lives. They aren't interested in arguing about religion since they
do not see it as relevant.
4. How does the prevalence of the secular worldview influence
the growth of the nones? [10.2]
In a secular worldview, religion is a potential block to human
progress and is viewed as something we need to outgrow. God and
religious beliefs are privatized, becoming irrelevant in society. Such
beliefs fuel the growth of the nones. When spiritual beliefs play
no role in public life and do not influence decisions in addressing
societal issues, God and the influence of religious beliefs begin to feel
irrelevant in our private lives as well.
5. What are three different ways of using the word humanism?
[10.2]
•Humanism may be used to describe the study of the humanities
(particularly at the period of the Renaissance), such as literature,
art, history, and poetry.
•Humanism may describe a worldview primarily concerned with human dignity,
potential, and well-being.
• Secular humanism is an atheistic or agnostic worldview exclusively focused on
the here and now.
INDIVIDUALISM
Students will assess
the pros and cons of
individualistic and
community-oriented
societies.
• Materials needed: student
textbook, paper, and pen
• Time required: 10-15
minutes
1. Have students work with a partner. Allow a few
minutes for them to answer the questions below on a
piece of paper.
• What are the potential pros and cons of
individualistic societies?
Possible Answer: Individualistic societies
emphasize the individual over the group. In
individualistic societies, challenging the status
quo, breaking from tradition, innovating, and
reforming is all celebrated. All these can be
positive. At its worst, an individualistic society
encourages selfishness, greed, and narcissism.
• What are the potential pros and cons of
community-oriented societies?
Possible Answer: Community-oriented societies
emphasize the group over the individual.
They prize honor, tradition, responsibility,
family loyalty, and care for others. At their best,
community-oriented societies teach us about
the value of relationships and our responsibility
to others. At their worst, they can cause shame
in those who are different, and they may make
reform very difficult because people are strongly
discouraged from breaking with tradition.)
• Which type best describes the culture in which
you live?
2. As a class, discuss their answers.
CHAPTER 10 | 175


<!-- page-4 (book p.10) -->

CH
Lesson 2:
Chapter P
10.3-10.4
Read the objectives to the class.
Go over the Discussion Questions
for Chapter 10.3-10.4.
Analyzing Misconception
#2 in their student manual.
Read the directions. Have PS
10.2 Misconception Answers
available. Assign the homework.
• Students will be able to analyze
two common misconceptions
about God and defend the
Christian perspective. [10.3]
O Students will be able to
critique two misconceptions:
one about religion and science
and one about religion being a
form of indoctrination. [10.4]
176 | CHAPTER 10
1. Is the misconception "religion is a fairy tale" an argument or
assertion? Why do some people believe that religion is a fairy
tale? How would you refute this claim? [10.3]
This misconception is an assertion often made by those who reject
the existence of a supernatural dimension and trust exclusively
in human and scientific achievement. But science deals with the
observable physical world. It helps us make educated guesses about
the supernatural, but it cannot definitively demonstrate its existence
or nonexistence. To say religion is only a fairy tale assumes there is
no good evidence for the truth of any religion. Yet, there is evidence
that suggests that some religious beliefs are true. This evidence needs
to be carefully examined, not merely dismissed as a fairy tale.
2. Have you ever had a religious experience? If so, describe where
it happened and what it was like. If not, what are some things
you can do to be available to experience God's presence? [10.3]
3. Do you think science discounts religion? Explain. [10.4]
4. Is science dependent on religion (Christianity) in any way?
[10.4]
Yes, science is dependent on Christianity. Science is impossible
without assumptions borrowed from a Christian worldview. For
example, to do science, we must believe our minds can lead us to
the truth. But if our minds are just the product of random chance
processes, why should we trust them to tell us the truth about
reality? Unless our brains were designed, as Christianity affirms, we
cannot trust our thinking. And if we cannot trust our thinking to be
true, we cannot be confident the conclusions we draw from science
are true.
5. In your own words, describe C.S. Lewis argument in Chapter
10.4. [10.4]
Possible answer: Lewis point is that if there is no creative mind
behind the universe, then our brains have not been designed for
thinking, in which case, all thought is simply the result of physical
processes. But if this is correct and our minds are merely the result
of chance, we can't know our thoughts are true. And if we cannot
trust our thinking to be accurate, we can't trust any arguments for
atheism or anything else. So, if we do not believe in God, we cannot
believe in the possibility of true thoughts, in which case, we can't use
thought to disprove God's existence.
ANALYZING MISCONCEPTION #2
Students will analyze
Misconception #2 to
ascertain if it is a sound and
valid argument.
1. Divide the class into groups of three or four. Have
students work with their group to answer the
questions on the Misconceptions #2 in the student
manual. Students may need to refer to Chapter 6 in
the student textbook. Allow 10 minutes to complete
• Materials needed: PS 10.2,
student textbook, and pen
20-25 minutes
the exercises.
2. Display PS 10.2 Misconception Answers. Direct groups
to check and discuss their responses. For the last
answer, emphasize that the absence of religious
experience is insufficient to prove that God is not
real. Also, many people claim to have religious
experiences. It is important to look carefully at
their stories to see whether such experiences are
believable.
ANALYZING MISCONCEPTION #2
Answer the following questions to analyze Misconception #2: I don't
have religious experiences, so God isn't real. Refer to Chapter 6 in your
student textbook.
1. What is the first thing you noticed when you read Misconception #2?
2. Explain why this misconception is an argument and not an assertion.
3. Is it a valid argument? Explain.
4. Is it a sound argument? Explain.
5. What type of argument is it-deductive or inductive? Explain.
6. Are there any fallacies in this argument? If so, what type?
CHAPTER 10 |


<!-- page-5 (book p.10) -->

CH
Lesson 3:
10.5-10.6 P
Read the objectives to the
class. Go over the Discussion
Questions for Chapter 10.5-10.6.
Misconception Pros in their
student manual. Read the
directions. Have copies of TR
10.3 Pros and Cons available.
Students will need it for today
and the next three lessons. Assign
the homework.
• Students will be able to
refute the misconceptions
that religion interferes with
our freedom, and promotes
prejudice, violence, and the
subjugation of women. [10.5]
O Students will be able to point
out false assumptions in the
misconception that people
don't need God or religion to
find meaning in life. [10.6]
© Have students read the article
The Hunger for Meaning, by
Dr. Jeff Myers in the online
Teacher Resources.
178 | CHAPTER 10
1. Why do some people feel that religion will interfere with their
freedom? [10.5]
Others see religion as a negative thing. For example, if someone
believes God is a self-righteous, angry, and vindictive control
freak, then his or her view of God will eventually become a source
of mental anguish and burden. Some people who don't want to
be accountable to God don't want anyone telling them how they
should live.
2. Do you ever feel that Christianity keeps you from having fun
or doing things you would like to do? Explain. [10.5]
3. Why do you think people who are suffering need a
"transcendent reference point" to give their lives meaning? [10.6]
Suffering so often seems entirely meaningless, and from an atheistic
view that is precisely what it is. Those who cannot find any meaning
amid their suffering may fall into despair and be unable to endure.
To endure suffering, we must believe that our lives have meaning
apart from the pain we are experiencing. We have to believe
that our suffering is not entirely pointless and that God has not
abandoned us.
4. Is it possible to live as if life has no meaning or purpose?
Explain. [10.6]
No, it is not possible. Even those who believe life has no meaning
acknowledge that it is impossible to live that way. To keep living and
not fall into total despair, we must find some source of meaning and
purpose for our lives. For Christians, this is found in Christianity
and our relationship with God.
MISCONCEPTION PROS
Students will examine a list
1. Divide the class into four teams. Assign two
of pros for
misconceptions below to each team below.
a specific misconception.
Team 1: Pro-Religion is a fairy tale.
Con-I don't need God or religion to find
• Materials needed: TR
10.3, computer, student
textbook, and pen
Team 2: Pro-I don't need God or religion to find
Con-Religion is a fairy tale.
Team 3: Pro-Religion is unnecessary because of
science.
Con-Religion promotes prejudice,
violence, and the subjugation of women.
Team 4: Pro-Religion promotes prejudice,
violence, and the subjugation of women
Con-Religion is unnecessary because of
science.
2. Explain that students will begin preparing for a
debate about four of the misconceptions discussed
in Chapter 10. Today they will use their computer
and student textbook to research the pros of the first
misconception listed by their team. Have students
find evidence to support why people believe those
misconceptions. During the debate, teams will defend
the validity of this misconception.
3. Distribute one copy of TR 10.3 Pros and Cons to each
student. Direct teams to research and take notes
for their pro misconception only. The cons will be
researched during the next class. Make sure students
list any sources they used. Inform students they will
need to bring TR 10.3 to the next three classes.
CHAPTER 10 | 179


<!-- page-6 (book p.10) -->

CH
Lesson 4:
10.7-10.8
P
Read the objectives to the
class. Go over the Discussion
Questions for Chapter 10.7-10.8.
Misconception Cons in their
student manual. Read the
directions. Students will need
their copies of TR 10.3 Pros and
Cons. Assign the homework.
O Students will be able identify
the errors in the misconception
that we don't need God or
religion to be moral. [10.7]
• Students will be able to explain
why Christianity is both a
religion and a relationship.
[10.8]
180 | CHAPTER 10
1. What are some problems with Stephen Fry's explanation of
morality? [10.7]
Fry's view is contradictory. He says we don't need any religious
authority to tell us how to live. But then he gives us a list of rules
to follow when making moral choices. So Fry inadvertently sets
himself up as the authority. Also, Fry implies religious people do not
think for themselves and are dependent upon religious authorities
to tell them what to do. This is an inaccurate representation of
Christianity's view of morality. The Bible does include moral
commands, but it also urges us to use wisdom, reason, experience,
and empathy and carefully consider our actions effects on others.
2. Why do we need an objective standard of morality? [10.7]
Without an objective moral standard, we cannot tell right from
wrong apart from each individual's subjective interpretation.
Without an objective moral standard, right and wrong may be only
what people decide. This may sound nice, but what if someone (or
a group of people decides that abuse or racism is acceptable? Unless
we adhere to some objective moral standard, we cannot say their
actions are wrong.
3. What are some of the relational aspects of Christianity? [10.8]
First, God created us to be in relationship with himself, ourselves,
others, and creation. These are essential and life-giving relationships.
Outside of relationship, we are cut off from the possibility of love
and true flourishing. Second, God's relational nature is most clearly
demonstrated in Jesus, who knows what it's like to be human and
invites us to know God personally. Third, the Holy Spirit indwells
believers, ensuring God's presence is always close at hand.
4. What's wrong with saying, "Christianity is a relationship, not
a religion": [10.8]
First, Christianity does have religious elements. It instructs us
about doctrine, calls us to worship the true God, and places
expectations on our behavior. Second, saying Christianity is just a
relationship emphasizes "you and Jesus" at the cost of deemphasizing
or completely ignoring our relationships with other people and
creation. The gospel is not just about individual souls but God's
restoration of all things. Christianity is unique because it sets
relationship at the heart of religion.
MISCONCEPTION CONS
Students will analyze and
1. Direct students to retrieve TR 10.3 Pros and Cons.
list the cons for a specific
Have them work with their team to research the
misconception.
cons of the second misconception listed for their
team. They may use their computers and student
• Materials needed: TR
10.3, computer, student
textbook, and pen
textbook to find the evidence to support why those
misconceptions are false beliefs.
Team 1: Pro-Religion is a fairy tale.
Con-I don't need God or religion to find
Team 2: Pro-I don't need God or religion to find
Con-Religion is a fairy tale.
Team 3: Pro-Religion is unnecessary because
of science.
Con-Religion promotes prejudice,
violence, and the subjugation of women.
Team 4: Pro-Religion promotes prejudice, violence,
and the subjugation of women.
Con-Religion is unnecessary because
of science.
2. During the debate, teams will argue against their
misconception, showing that it is untrue. Make sure
students list any sources they used.
3. Remind students they will need to bring TR 10.3 to
the next two classes.
CHAPTER 10 | 181


<!-- page-7 (book p.10) -->

CH
Lesson 5:
Chapter P
10.9-10.10
Read the objectives to the class.
Go over the Discussion Questions
for Chapter 10.9-10.10. Have
students turn to Activity: Debate
Practice in their student manual.
Read the directions. Have PS
10.5 Debate Rubric ready to
display. Students will need their
copies of TR 10.3 Pros and
Cons. (Optional) Assign TR
10.SG Chapter 10 Study Guide
to prepare for Chapter 10 Test.
OBJECTIVE
O Students will be able to specify
the difference between idolatry
and true godly worship. [10.9]
182 | CHAPTER 10
QUESTIONS
1. How does Scripture describe our state outside of Christ? [10.9]
Apart from Christ, we are enslaved to sin and subject to our evil
inclinations. Rather than being free to do whatever we please, we are
slaves to sin and unable to break our chains.
2. What is idolatry, and what forms does it take today? [10.9]
Idolatry is the act of worshipping or valuing someone or
something above God. Idolatry can take many forms. Sometimes,
it involves bowing down to physical idols, but often, it is just
placing something above God-knowledge, pleasure, money,
accomplishments, power, fame, sex, food, another person, or
ourselves. Another way we commit idolatry is by creating our own
version of God who accords with our personal feelings, preferences,
or desires.
3. Why is right worship so important? [10.9]
All of us will worship someone or something. It is essential that we
worship God as the One rightfully deserving of all worship because
we will become like whatever we worship (Psalm 115:15-18). If
the person or object we worship is not the one true God, we are in
danger of destroying ourselves and others.
4. In what three ways is Jesus relevant in our lives today? [10.10]
• Jesus helps us see what God is really like. He is not distant or
uninterested but involved in human life. He knows what it is like
to be human. Jesus also shows us God is loving and self-sacrificial,
not cruel and vindictive.
• Jesus helps us become the people we were created to be. In
following him, we are set free from our chains and enabled to live
fully and freely.
• Jesus transforms our relationships with other people and creation.
In Jesus, we can be reconciled to one another and see people
as God's image-bearers. We take our stewardship responsibility
seriously and patiently await the day when God makes all
things new.
DEBATE PRACTICE
Students will develop their
1. Have students retrieve TR 10.3 Pros and Cons and
arguments for a debate
work with their team. Direct them to review the
about misconceptions.
notes they took for their assigned misconceptions.
Then, have them organize the notes and develop
• Materials needed: TR 10.3,
PS 10.5, computer, student
textbook, paper, and pen
arguments for their misconceptions. Students may
use their computer and student textbook for last-
minute research. Point out that everyone on the
debate teams must take turns participating.
2. When the debate begins, Teams 1 and 2 will debate
first. Teams 3 and 4 will debate next. Suggested
timing for debate: Each team will have eight minutes
to complete their debate, including four minutes
to present the team's position, two minutes for the
opposing team to respond, and two minutes for
the counter-response, for a total of eight minutes
per team.
3. Display PS 10.5 Debate Rubric. Read and explain the
criteria teams will use to evaluate each other. Teams
1 and 2 will be evaluated by Teams 3 and 4; Teams 3
and 4 by Teams 1 and 2.
4. Once teams have developed their strategies,
have them practice what they plan to say. For
planning purposes, provide time guidelines for
their statements during the debate. Point out that
students may cite any authors or resources from
their list during the debate to strengthen their
argument. To make it a fair debate, it is important
that the opposing groups do not try to listen to their
opponents while they are practicing. Students will be
able to have TR 10.3 with them during the debate.
CHAPTER 10 | 183


<!-- page-8 (book p.10) -->

CH
Lesson 6:
P
Use PS 10.6 Debate Details
to guide students through the
activity. Make sure students
have their copies of TR 10.3
Pros and Cons and any other
information they will need for the
debate. Have copies of TR 10.6
Debate Evaluation available.
Have the debate tables and chairs
prearranged for the number of
students that will participate on
each debate team.
© Use TR 10.A Ch 10 Video
Discussion Questions for the
video links available in the
online teacher resources, and
make one copy of the video
discussion questions for each
student.
First Round of Debates
| CHAPTER 10
DEBATING MISCONCEPTIONS
Students will debate and evaluate the pros and cons of
their assigned misconceptions.
• Materials needed: PS 10.6, TR 10.3, TR 10.6, student
textbook, debate strategies developed on Day 5, and timer
• Time required: 45-50 minutes
1. Teams 1 and 2 will debate first. Direct them to take their
seats at the debate tables, one team on either side.
Ensure students have their copies of TR 10.3 Pros and
Cons and any other strategies they will need.
2. Have Teams 3 and 4 remain at their desks. Distribute
two copies of TR 10.6 Debate Evaluation to each student
on those teams. Read the directions and explain that
they will evaluate Teams 1 and 2 as they debate their
topics. Student must be honest and unbiased in their
evaluations.
3. Display PS 10.6 Debate Details and read slide 1. Allow
Teams 1 and 2 to present their arguments. Emphasize
that everyone on the debating teams must take turns
participating. Direct Teams 3 and 4 to evaluate the
debaters. Allow a maximum of eight minutes for each
debate.
4. Read slide 2. Have Teams 1 and 2 sit at their desks and
distribute two copies of TR 10.6 to those students. Direct
Teams 3 and 4 to sit at the debate tables and present
their arguments. Direct Teams 1 and 2 to evaluate the
debaters.
5. Have students share their evaluations with the teams.
Lesson 7:
and
Review p
How Would You Respond? in
their student manual. Read the
directions. Lead students through
the activity. Use TR 10.7 How
Would You Respond? for the
answers.
Then display PS 10.7 Chapter 10
Review to help students review
the concepts in Chapter 10.
Allow students to discuss chapter
concepts, take notes, and use TR
10.SG Chapter 10 Study Guide.
CHAPTER 10 REVIEW
Key Terms
atheism
agnosticism
nothing in particular
secularism
humanism
individualism
idolatry
Key Verses
Psalm 95:6
Matthew 7:12
John 17:3
1 Thessalonians 5:20-22
1 Peter 3:15
HOW WOULD YOU RESPOND?
Students will practice offering responses to
misconceptions about God and religion.
• Materials needed: TR 10.7 and student textbook
• Time required: 20-25 minutes
1. This activity allows students to respond to some of
the misconceptions about God and religion as if they
are talking with someone. There are two ways to do
this activity. First, you can choose to ask the questions
and have a class discussion, or you can choose to have
students take turns dialoging the answers. If you choose
this method, you will need two student volunteers
for each question-one to pose as the person with
the misconception and one to pose as the Christian
responding to the misconception.
2. Use TR 10.7 How Would You Respond? Answer Key as
needed.
3. Have students discuss or engage in a short dialogue to
answer the following questions:
• How might you respond to someone who believes
the misconception, "I don't have religious
experiences, so God isn't real"?
• How would you respond to a person who has the
misconception, "Religious instruction is a form of
indoctrination"?
• How would you respond to a person's misconception
that "Religion will interfere with my freedom"?
• How might you respond to someone who says, "l
don't need God or religion to be moral"?
4. If students engage in dialogue, have the rest of the class
discuss their thoughts about the conversations.
Questioning Religion
CHAPTER 10 | 185


<!-- page-9 (book p.10) -->

CH
10 Test P
Distribute TR 10.8 Chapter 10 Test to each student and allow
time for them to complete the exercises. Students who finish early
may start reading Chapter 11. Assign the homework.
Notes
The Supernatural
and Truth
186 | CHAPTER 10
