# Chapter 13

<!-- page-1 (book p.12) -->

CH
12 Test P
Distribute TR 12.8 Chapter 12 Test to each student and allow
time for them to complete the exercises. Students who finish early
may start reading Chapter 13. Assign the homework.
Notes
222 | CHAPTER 12


<!-- page-2 -->

Chapter 13 Syllabus
Lesson
REVIEW
WATCH
REVIEW FOR
GIVE
Additional alternate content
STUDY FOR
Assignment
Chapter 12 Test
Questions for Chapter 13.1-13.2
Activity: Suffering and God
Chapter 13.3-13.4
Questions for Chapter 13.3-13.4
Questions for Chapter 13.3-13.4
Activity: The Problem of Evil
Chapter 13.5-13.6
Questions for Chapter 13.5-13.6
Questions for Chapter 13.5-13.6
Activity: To Seek or Not to Seek
Chapter 13.7-13.8
Questions for Chapter 13.7-13.8
Questions for Chapter 13.7-13.8
Activity: Has Evil Been Defeated?
Chapter 13.9-13.10
Questions for Chapter 13.9-13.10
Questions for Chapter 13.9-13.10
Activity: Writing a Psalm of Lament
Videos
Video Questions
Video Questions
Activity: Pic-A-Rades
Chapter 14.1-14.2
Questions for Chapter 14.1-14.2
Activity: Good from Evil
Study Guide Questions
Student Textbook (ST) Student Manual (SM)
224 | CHAPTER 13
Page
ST 212-215
SM 240
ST 215-218
SM 242
ST 219-221
SM 244
ST 221-225
SM 246
235-236
SM 249-251
237-239
240-241
ST 226-229
SM 256
PS 13.A, TR 13.A
TR 13.SG
Chapter 13
OVERVIEW
In a world with so much evil, pain, and
suffering, we can find ourselves wondering
where God is. Some even question if God
exists at all. If God is good, why does he
allow the existence of so much evil? To
understand the problem of evil, however, we
first need to know what evil is-that which
deviates from the good. Moral evil is evil
brought about by the actions of personal
beings. Natural evil is evil resulting from
acts of nature.
Is it possible for God and evil to coexist?
Atheists don't think so. Two arguments
express this belief: the first is the logical
problem of evil, and the second argument
is the evidential problem of evil. Eastern
religions believe that evil and physical
suffering are simply an illusion. The
Christian approach claims that God did not
create evil, but he did create creatures with
the ability to choose good or evil. Therefore,
God made evil possible, but Satan and
humans make it actual. The free will defense
suggests that to make creatures who are free
to choose good or evil but then prevent
them from choosing evil is not actually
freedom.
The wonderful and unique thing
about the problem of evil is that God took
responsibility for it—for us! He did this by
becoming one of us. Living a fully human
life, Jesus knew what it was to feel every
emotion we feel. On the cross, Jesus took on
the full weight of human evil and let himself
be crushed by it.
Today, as we await the arrival of God's
kingdom, the church can help alleviate evil
and suffering. This is done by lamenting,
recognizing that suffering is an essential
part of our calling as Christians, fighting
against evil, and anticipating Christ's final
restoration by working for good. Finally,
and most importantly, the church prays!
5 Evil and Suffering
PREPARATION P
Lesson 1:
Preview PS 13.1 Does God Exist?
to familiarize yourself with the
cosmological, design, and moral
arguments.
Lesson 2:
Make one copy of TR 13.2 The
Problem of Evil for each student.
Make one copy of the Answer Key
for yourself.
Lesson 3:
Make a copy of TR 13.3 Seeking
God in Suffering for each student.
Make a copy of the Answer Key for
yourself.
Lesson 4:
Access and preview the video listed
in the lesson. See the inside back
cover for instructions to stream
videos.
Lesson 6:
Access and preview the six videos
listed on Lesson 6. See the inside
back cover of this manual for
video-streaming instructions.
Lesson 7:
Make one copy of TR 13.7 Pic-A-
Rades and laminate it (optional).
Cut out the cards, set the two
tie-breaker cards aside, mix up the
other cards, and form a deck.
Print a copy of TR 13.8 Chapter 13
Test for each student.
LESSON MATERIALS
Presentation Slides
PS 13.1 Does God Exist?
PS 13.7 Chapter 13 Review
PS 13.A Good from Evil: Hymns
Teacher Resources
TR 13.2 The Problem of Evil
TR 13.3 Seeking God in Suffering
TR 13.7 Pic-A-Rades
TR 13.SG Chapter 13 Study Guide
TR 13.8 Chapter 13 Test
TR 13.A Good from Evil
CHAPTER 13 | 225


<!-- page-3 (book p.13) -->

CH
Lesson 1:
13.1-13.2
, P
Review Chapter 12 Test. Have
students turn to page 208 in
their student textbook. Read the
objectives to the class. Go over
the answers to the Discussion
Questions for Chapter 13.1-13.2
on page 238 in the student
manual. Have students turn to
Activity: Suffering and God.
Have PS 13.1 Does God Exist?
ready to display. Assign the
homework.
correlate experiences of
hardship with challenges to
one's faith. [13.1]
• Students will be able to analyze
two atheistic arguments that
deny the existence of God
because of evil and suffering.
[13.2]
© Have students read the article
The Problem of Evil: Asking
the Questions & Living the
Questions, by Ben Keiser, in
the online Teacher Resources.
226 | CHAPTER 13
1. What do you think Elie Wiesel meant when he said that God
was "hanging here from this gallows"? [13.1]
Wiesel is not explicit about his meaning, but possibly in light of his
other quotation, he meant to communicate that the unjust suffering
and death of the young boy contributed to the death of his faith
in God. Just as God, in Wiesel's heart, was metaphorically dying
by hanging from the gallows, so too, Wiesel's faith was dying as he
witnessed the horrors of the concentration camp.
2. Can evil exist without good? Explain. [13.2]
Evil cannot exist without good because evil is not an actual
substance. It is only the absence of what is good. Without good, how
can we know what evil is?
3. What is the difference between moral evil and natural evil, and
what are some examples of each? [13.2]
Moral evil is evil brought about by the actions of personal beings—
humans, Satan, or demons. Betrayal, murder, and adultery are some
examples. Natural evil is evil that results from acts of nature such as
earthquakes, fires, and diseases. Natural evil may be exacerbated by
human actions, but it is not directly caused by humans.
4. What are two faulty assumptions made by those who say that
it is logically impossible for God and suffering to coexist? [13.2]
The first assumption is that God can make any world he wants. God
is, indeed, strong enough to do anything. Yet, as a logical God, he
will not contradict his nature by doing something illogical to him.
So, if he wants a world with free creatures, he cannot simultaneously
prevent them from choosing evil. The second assumption is that
God prefers a world without suffering. However, since some good
things come out of suffering, it is at least possible that God could
have a reason for permitting it.
5. How would you respond to Stephen Fry's complaint against
God? [13.2]
Possible answers: Fry may assume that humans are able to know
there is no good reason for suffering. However, if humans are finite
and God is infinite, we simply cannot know there isn't a reason for
suffering. Using the existence of evil to disprove God's existence,
Fry attempts to show the problem of suffering outweighs other
arguments for God's existence.
SUFFERING AND GOD
Students will summarize
1. Ask students to think of a time when they
three arguments that
experienced suffering. Have them write a couple
defend the existence of
of sentences explaining what happened, how they
God.
felt, and if the event caused them to question God's
existence during this time.
• Materials needed: PS 13.1,
paper and pen
15-20 minutes
2. Have volunteers share what kind of questions they
had about God as a result of their painful experience.
Explain that evil and suffering can often tempt people
to doubt God's character and sometimes even doubt
his existence. However, during these times, it is
important to keep our minds fixed on God's truth.
3. Display PS 13.1 Does God Exist? Read slide 1. Explain
that reminding ourselves to "destroy arguments and
every lofty opinion raised against the knowledge
of God, and to take every thought captive to obey
Christ" (2 Corinthians 10:5) is one of the best things
we can do when experiencing suffering.
4. Have volunteers read slides 2-9. Invite students to
summarize each argument in their own words and
describe how they may have used an argument in
conversation outside of school. Encourage students
to remember these arguments so they can use them
in the future.
CHAPTER 13 | 227


<!-- page-4 (book p.13) -->

CH
Lesson 2:
13.3-13.4 P
for Chapter 13.3-13.4.
Have students turn to Activity:
The Problem of Evil in their
student manual. Have copies
of TR 13.2 The Problem of
Evil available, and a copy of the
Answer Key for yourself. Assign
the homework.
summarize and critique how
atheistic and Eastern religion
worldviews address the
problem of evil. [13.3]
O Students will be able to
validate God's design and
purpose of free will.
228 | CHAPTER 13
1. Why does evil only make sense if God exists? [13.3]
Unless there is an objective good, we have no standard by which we
can call anything evil. To say that anything is objectively evil, we
must believe in an objective good, which is impossible without God.
Where would good come from if not God?
2. What is the problem with the Daoist way of thinking about
good and evil? [13.3]
A Daoist view says that good and evil are part of the same whole;
they are essential to each other. Yet, nothing can really be called good
or evil since we do not know what kind of outcome will result from
perceived good or bad fortune. This view's flaw is if we can't call
anything evil, we have no reason to stop it or the suffering it causes.
3. Did God create evil? If so, why? If not, where did evil come
from? [13.4]
Scripture is clear that evil was not part of God's good creation and
that he does not cause evil. However, created creatures that could
choose good or evil. Therefore, God made evil possible, but humans
and Satan made it actual. It seems that evil began with the rebellion
of Satan and the fall of humans into sin. The human choice to rebel
against God brought destructive consequences for all creation.
4. Explain the free will defense in your own words. [13.4]
Students' answers should include key elements from Alvin
Plantinga's explanation of the free will defense.
•A world that contains creatures who are free is more valuable than a
world with creatures that don't have choices.
•God can create free creatures, but he can't make them only do what
is right. If he did that, then those creatures wouldn't be free.
•To create creatures capable of moral good, those creatures must
also be capable of moral evil. God can't logically give creatures the
freedom to perform evil and prevent them from doing it.
•Some of the free creatures God created went wrong in their free will
choices, which is the source of moral evil. This does not mean God
isn't omnipotent or all good.
5. What are some possible reasons why God allows natural evil to
exist? [13.4]
The Bible explains that creation was thrown into chaos as a result
of humans sinful choices. Some philosophers believe our world is
the best possible world, and natural disasters are necessary to its
proper functioning. Some suggest natural disasters even existed
before the fall, but God may have protected humans from their
destructive consequences. Others say natural evil could be the result
of demonic activity.
THE PROBLEM OF EVIL
Students will evaluate three
1. Have students work independently to complete
worldviews for the most
TR 13.2 The Problem of Evil. They will need to use
plausible explanation
Chapter 13.3-13.4 as they fill out the chart. Students
for evil.
may rephrase or logically infer any elements of the
worldview's explanations of evil. However, they are
• Materials needed: TR 13.2,
student textbook, and pen
20-25 minutes
to stay within the scope of the information in the
student textbook.
2. Students will decide which worldview explanation
about the problem of evil is the most logical. On the
top row, have students list the things that make sense
about each of the three worldview's explanation of
evil. On the bottom row, have them list the things
that don't make sense about each of the worldview's
explanations.
3. Direct students to count the number of pros for
each worldview and record the scores in response
to question 1 on TR 13.2. Then, count the cons and
record those in response to question 2. Subtract
the cons from the pros and enter those scores in
response to question 3. Some of these final scores
may be negative numbers.
4. Then, students will write the name of the worldview
which had the highest positive number of pros in
response to question 4. Use the Answer Key to guide
students as necessary.
5. Direct students to answer question 5. Allow
volunteers to share their answers with the class.
CHAPTER 13 | 229


<!-- page-5 (book p.13) -->

CH
Lesson 3:
13.5-13.6 P
for Chapter 13.5-13.6. Have
students turn to Activity: To Seek
or Not to Seek in the student
manual. Have copies of TR
13.3 Seeking God in Suffering
available. Keep a copy of the
Answer Key for yourself. Assign
the homework.
defend God's sovereignty and
coexistence with good and evil.
[13.5]
articulate the appropriate way
to respond in the midst of evil
and suffering. [13.6]
© Have students read the article
Dealing with Hurt and
Trusting God: Biblical Tips
for Overcoming Pain, Stand
Strong Ministries in the online
Teacher Resources.
I secking God in Suffering
230 | CHAPTER 13
1. Is the suffering we experience God's direct will for us? Explain.
[13.5]
Suffering is not God's direct will for us. God does not cause evil,
though he may permit it. When we experience suffering, God wants
to work through it to grow us in virtue or bring about some other
good, but suffering is not what God desires for us. God created us
to live in shalom, and he is angry about the evil that has corrupted
2. How does open theism attempt to deal with the problem of
evil? [13.5]
Open theism says that while God is all-knowing, he only comes
to know the free will decisions that humans make as they happen.
Because he is all-wise, he can make accurate guesses and always
works to bring about the best. Ultimately, however, God cannot be
blamed for evil since he doesn't know with certainty what choices
humans will make. This view is not a historical Christian position
and faces scriptural challenges.
3. How would you describe God's foreknowledge and
sovereignty? [13.5]
Answers will vary but should include the fact that God is sovereign,
possessing supreme power and authority over all creation. He
does not dictate every action we take; instead, he creates a world
where humans have free will. He knows all things, including the
free choices-
good or bad—humans will make and the outcomes
of those choices. God never abandons us and continues to work
through all things to achieve his redemptive purposes for creation.
4. Is it okay to express our feelings and concerns to God when we
experience suffering? Explain. [13.6]
God desires that we share our true feelings with him. God invites
us to ask questions, express disappointment, and cry out to him.
The writers of Scripture regularly complain to God about the evil
they have experienced and God's apparent silence or indifference to
it. It is important to remain respectful when communicating these
feelings to God. He must be treated with reverence.
5. What did Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn mean when he said, "The
line dividing good and evil cuts through the heart of every
human being": [13.6]
He meant that evil is not something that we can blame on just one
person or group. Evil is a personal problem for everyone. We have
all done evil, and we are all responsible for the evil in the world.
As Scripture affirms, each person is compromised by evil and guilty
of sin.
TO SEEK OR NOT TO SEEK
Students will analyze Bible
1. Distribute a copy of TR 13.3 Seeking God in Suffering
passages for appropriate
to each student. Have them work with a partner to
responses to times of
read the Bible passages and answer the questions.
distress.
2. Encourage full class participation as you guide the
class in discussing the questions. Use the Answer
• Materials needed:
TR 13.3, Bible, and pen
20-25 minutes
Key to go over the answers. Reinforce the fact that
just because we may be obedient and do things the
way God wants us to do them doesn't mean God will
always give us what we want or ask for. The essential
thing for us is to take all our cares and requests to
him (Philippians 4:6, 1 Peter 5:7).
CHAPTER 13 | 231


<!-- page-6 (book p.13) -->

CH
Lesson 4:
13.7-13.8 p
for Chapter 13.7-13.8. Assign the
homework.
• Students will be able to express
how God took responsibility
for us and and responded to
the problem of evil. [13.7]
• Students will be able to explain
that there is hope even in a
world with evil and suffering.
[13.8]
232 | CHAPTER 13
1. What is God's response to evil and suffering? [13.7]
God takes responsibility for it by becoming one of us. Jesus lived
a fully human life, experiencing all the pains and joys of earthly
life. He knew what it was to feel pain and loss, to suffer loneliness,
abandonment, and physical torture. On the cross, Jesus suffered for
us, taking the full weight of our sin on himself.
2. Why do you think Jesus wept at Lazarus' tomb? [13.7]
Possible answers: Jesus wept because he was fully human and can
identify with our pain. He wept for the suffering that sin and death
have brought on all humans.
3. What does it mean to say that God is "at the very center of the
world's pain, suffering with us, suffering for us"? [13.7]
On the cross, Jesus suffered for all evil actions—past, present, and
future. In so doing, he suffered for all people. Jesus identifies with us
in suffering. He still weeps for the evil that humans experience and
cause in this life. He is grieved over the evil that plagues his creation.
4. How did Jesus defeat evil through his death and resurrection?
[13.8]
On the cross, Jesus showed he was the world's true King, but his
kingdom doesn't come through violence or coercion. Instead, it
comes through long-suffering love. Instead of returning evil for evil
to his accusers, Jesus prayed for their forgiveness. On the cross, he
"disarmed the rulers and authorities and put them to open shame"
(Colossians 2:15). He then sealed his victory over evil by rising from
the dead, showing that death had no ultimate power over him.
5. How did Jesus deal with our sin through his death and
resurrection? [13.8]
On the cross, Jesus took our place, suffering the punishment that
we deserve so that we can be made right with God. Our sin has
been paid for. His resurrection shows that the power of sin has
been broken. We are no longer enslaved. One day, all sin will be
eradicated.
HAS EVIL BEEN DEFEATED?
Students will explain the
• Materials needed: Video-"Did
importance of the cross and
Jesus Defeat Evil?" (Wilson,
why evil still exists.
7:05), paper, and pen
• Time required: 25-30 minutes
1. Have students discuss the following question: If Jesus died on the cross and conquered
sin and death, why does evil still exist? Allow them to share their thoughts.
2. Play the video "Did Jesus Defeat Evil?" Direct students to take notes during the video.
3. Discuss the following with the class:
• What is the Mosaic Covenant?
Possible Answer: It is a conditional covenant, also called the Old Covenant, made
between God and the nation of Israel at Mount Sinai as seen in Exodus 19-24.
•Read Romans 3:23 and 6:23. What do these verses point out?
Possible Answer: We are all sinners and the wages of sin is death, but because of
the free gift of God, we have eternal life through Christ Jesus.
• What was problem came with that law?
Possible Answer: People kept sinning which meant sacrifices had to be continually
offered.
•According to the book of Hebrews, what two things did Jesus do at the cross?
Possible Answer: Jesus officiated the sacrifice referenced in the Mosaic Covenant
as the high priest, and he is also the sacrifice himself.
• Why is this important?
Possible Answer: Only those without fault aren't subject to the law of sin and
death. Jesus is the only perfect being, making him the perfect sacrifice.
• Did Jesus conquer evil at the cross?
Possible Answer: No, he paid the debt for us by offering himself willingly as the
sacrifice.
• Why is there still evil in the world?
Possible Answer: On the cross, Jesus defeated the powers of evil. Yet Satan
manipulated the perfect creation and will continue to do so until the end.)
• What is the good news about evil?
Possible Answer: Even though evil still exists, it doesn't have a grip on those who
are in Christ Jesus.
• Think about how you answered the initial question: If Jesus died on the cross and
conquered sin and death, why does evil still exist? Has your answer changed now?
How?
Answers will vary.
9 Evil and Suffering
CHAPTER 13 | 233


<!-- page-7 (book p.13) -->

CH
Lesson 5:
13.9-13.10
Read the objective to the class. Go
over the Discussion Questions for
Chapter 13.9-13.10.
Have students turn to Activity: A
Psalm of Lament in their student
manual. (Optional) Assign TR
13.SG Chapter 13 Study Guide
to prepare for Chapter 13 Test.
OBJECTIVE
O Students will be able to
describe four ways in which
the church can respond to evil.
[13.9]
ENRICHMENT ACTIVITY
© Use TR 13.A Activity: Good
from Evil in class for an
additional or alternate class
activity.
234 | CHAPTER 13
1. What are some ways you and your church could practice
lamenting? [13.9]
Possible answers: You could be a loving presence for someone who is
hurting by visiting them, compassionately listening to their sorrows
without trying to offer solution, and crying out to God with them.
A church could practice lamenting by marking out specific days
to lament and pray over communal or national sins and suffering
caused by moral or natural evil.
2. How is suffering a part of our calling as a Christian? [13.9]
Christians are not promised a safe and easy life. We will have trouble
and tribulation. We are called to deny ourselves, carry our cross, and
imitate Jesus in his suffering. We don't need to seek out suffering,
but neither are we called to avoid it at all costs. When we experience
suffering for following Jesus, we are blessed.
3. What are some tangible ways you can resist evil in your own
life and in your community? [13.9]
Possible answers: You can be honest about the sin in your own life.
This might mean finding a wise and compassionate fellow Christian
with whom you can confess sin and seek accountability and spiritual
growth. You can also seek to remove destructive influences from your
life, take every thought captive for Christ, and put on the armor of
God. In your community, you might resist evil by getting involved
with your church and other organizations seeking to alleviate
poverty, promote justice and reconciliation, and foster Christian
values.
4. What does the story of Job teach us about the problem of evil
and suffering? [13.10]
There are no easy answers to the problem of evil and suffering. We
cannot, with our finite minds, comprehend all the reasons why God
might allow us to experience suffering. God's ultimate answer to
the problem is himself. In a personal encounter with God, Job was
once again able to trust. Similarly, the story encourages us (even
in suffering) to trust God, who is infinite in wisdom, power, and
might.
WRITING A PSALM OF LAMENT
Students will express their
sorrow, pain, or suffering by
writing a psalm of lament.
• Materials needed: Bible
• Time required: 20-25 minutes
1. Ask students to name the different types of genre contained in the Psalms. Students
may use their Bible as reference.
Answers may include Psalms of praise, thanksgiving, poetry, narrative,
and Psalms of lament.
Focus on the psalms of lament, as they are the largest class of psalms and were
a normal part of Israel's praise and worship.
2. Discuss the following questions with students:
• What is a psalm of lament?
Answer: A prayer expressing sorrow, pain, or confusion.
• Why is a psalm of lament a meaningful way for Christians to process grief in God's
presence?
Answer: A psalm of lament is an address to God in which one shares personal
concerns, objections, and requests. It usually includes an expression of trust in God.
•What types of concerns are expressed in psalms of lament?
Answer: Often, concerns are expressed about the actions of another person or are
about God's action or inaction.
• What are some of the emotions expressed in a psalm of lament?
Answer: Laments include cries of despair, anger, protest, and doubt.
3. In the Writing a Psalm of Lament, have students review the five parts of a Psalm of
lament using Psalm 4:1-8 as an example. Direct students to work with partner to read
and practice identifying the five main parts in one of the following Psalms: 5, 7, 13, 14,
17,22, 25, 26, 27, 28, 31.
4. Then, have students recall a time of their own personal sorrow and write a psalm of
lament to God in the space provided in the student manual.
5. Ask for volunteers to share their laments with the class.
CHAPTER 13 | 235


<!-- page-8 (book p.13) -->

CH
13.9-13.10
(continued)
WRITING A PSALM OF LAMENT
The general structure of a psalm of lament in five main parts:
1. Address and Introductory Cry: Identifies the Lord as the
one to whom the psalm is addressed.
2. Concern or Lament: Describes the problem and asks God
for help.
3. Confession of Trust: Confirms the writer's trust in God.
4. Prayer for Deliverance: Requests God's intervention in the
situation.
5. Praise: Offers praise and thanksgiving to God for his many
blessings.
Example: Psalm 4:1-8
ADDRESS AND INTRODUCTORY CRY
1 "Answer me when I call, O God of my righteousness! You
have given me relief when I was in distress. Be gracious
to me and hear my prayer!"
COMPLAINT OR LAMENT
2 "O men, how long shall my honor be turned into
shame? How long will you love vain words and seek after
lies? Selah"
CONFESSION OF TRUST
3 "But know that the Lord has set apart the godly for
himself; the Lord hears when I call to him."
PRAYER FOR DELIVERANCE
4 "Be angry, and do not sin; ponder in your own hearts on
your beds and be silent. Selah"
5 "Offer right sacrifices and put your trust in the LoRD."
6 "There are many who say, 'Who will show us some
good? Lift up the light of your face upon us, O LoRD!"
PRAISE
7 "You have put more joy in my heart than they have
when their grain and wine abound."
s "In peace I will lie down and sleep, for you alone, LoRD,
make me dwell in safety."
Lesson 6:
Videos P
In this lesson, students will view
six interviews of various Christian
educators and authors.
Each expert answers a specific
worldview or apologetics
question. These videos will allow
students to expand their
knowledge and provide biblical
answers to thought-provoking
questions. Note that some of the
video topics are very sensitive. The
following videos will be used in
today's lesson:
1. How Does Atheism Explain
Evil? (Noyes, 2:04)
2. Why Is There Suffering?
(Galvan, 2:11)
3. How Should Christians
Respond to Evil? (Noyes, 2:08)
4. Asking for Help When
Suffering (Galvan, 2:29)
5. When Your Friend Died by
Suicide (Galvan, 3:06)
6. Helping Your Hurting Friends
(Galvan, 2:32)
Play the videos one at a time in
the order listed above. Before each
video, direct students to read the
questions associated with that
video in their student manual
so they know what to listen for.
During and after the video has
been shown, students should write
their answers to the Discussion
Questions. It may be necessary to
play the video again so students
can answer all the questions.
Go over the questions for the
first video. Play the next video.
Continue in this manner until
the last video has been played and
questions have been discussed.
© Evil and Suffering
236 | CHAPTER 13
• Video 1:
How Does Atheism Explain Evil?
1. When the speaker was an atheist, how did he explain evil?
He said he didn't have an explanation for it.
2. The speaker believed morals were _
Theywere a matter of
personal preference
subjective
3. Since he had no standard for good or bad, who or what did he
believe came up with the standards?
He believed the community came up with the standards.
4. What eventually convinced the speaker that atheism was false?
He couldn't explain evil. When something bad happened, he had
nowhere to turn outside himself.
5. What was it about Christian theism that made sense to the
speaker?
Christian theism has a standard and a standard giver-God.
Video 2:
Why is There Suffering?
1. Why is suffering unavoidable?
Suffering is unavoidable because we live in a fallen world and sin is
inside of it.
2. God didn't come up with the idea of suffering so he could
manipulate
us into
loving
him.
Suffering
is something God took and made it good
3. What does compassion mean?
Compassion means to suffer together.
4. What is the purpose of suffering?
It teaches us to show compassion to one another.
Video 3:
How Should Christians Respond to Evil?
1. The apostle Paul explains suffering as
momentary
light afflictions,_
producing
in us an eternal weight of
glory
far beyond all comparison.
CHAPTER 13 | 237


<!-- page-9 (book p.13) -->

CH
Videos
(continued)
2. Paul pointed out two things about suffering. What was the first thing?
Suffering is momentary.
3. What was the speaker's advice in remembering that suffering is
momentary?
Don't confuse the moment with the entirety of your story because it will pass,
especially on the timeline of eternity. Glory awaits you.
4. What was Paul's second point?
When we press on, something is produced in us that wouldn't be there is we
didn't go through suffering. God is using you, growing you, and calling you
to completion.
• Video 4:
Asking for Help When Suffering
1. What is the hardest thing to do when we are in pain?
The hardest thing to do is to acknowledge that it is pain, that it hurts.
2. What is another hard thing to do when suffering? Why?
Asking for help is hard to do because we fear it will be a burden.
3. What is the strongest thing we can do when we are in pain?
We can allow someone to walk with us and ask for help.
4. We find
hope
and
healing
when we ask for help.
• Video 5:
Helping Your Hurting Friends
1. When my friend is hurting, you can ask him or her what is -
helpful
for you? What do I do that's.
helpful to you? What would
cause more-
pain
to you?
2. What is your job as a friend?
Walk alongside my friend.
3. Don't give them the
problem
→ or_
solution
discount
. Don't fix
_ the
4. What is the most important thing you can do for your friends when they
are hurting?
Just being there with them.
• Video 6:
When Your Friend Died by Suicide
1. What does the pain of losing a friend to suicide leave us with?
It leaves us with many questions.
2. Be encouraged to _
well. Allow yourself to
experience
the pain with the help of a.
therapist
or _
support
_ groups.
3. Know that you are not
alone
and a
role
to play. Don't
yourself to share
that story.
. You have a _
suppress
story
the pain. Allow
4. Connect with a _
he
other
trusted
side
adult. There is
hope
in the midst of all this for you.
_on
238 | CHAPTER 13
CHAPTER 13 | 239


<!-- page-10 (book p.13) -->

CH
Lesson 7:
and
Review P
Have students turn to Activity:
Pic-A-Rades in their student
manual. Set the deck of cards
formed from TR 13.7 Pic-A-
Rades on a table or desk at the
front of the room. Keep the two
tie-breaker cards available but
separate from the deck. Lead
students through the activity.
Display PS 13.7 Chapter
13 Review to help students
review the concepts in Chapter
Allow students to discuss chapter
concepts, take notes, and use
TR 13.SG Chapter 13 Study
Guide as needed.
CHAPTER 13 REVIEW
Key Terms
evil
moral evil
natural evil
suffering
good
theodicy
sovereign
lament
Key Verses
Genesis 50:20
James 1:13
Psalm 22:1-2
Colossians 2:15
Romans 8:37
PIC-A-RADES
Students will demonstrate the meaning of key terms and
concepts from Chapter 13.
• Materials needed: TR 13.7 and timer
• Time required: 20-25 minutes
1. Divide the class into two teams and have each team
sit together facing the front of the classroom. Inform
students that the teams will be competing against each
other in a game called Pic-A-Rades. Indicate the deck of
cards from TR 13.7 Pic-A-Rades and explain that each
card has a term on it from Chapter 13. Teams will take
turns trying to guess the terms.
2. Have a student from Team 1 come forward and select
a card from the deck. The student will choose to either
draw or act out clues for the term. Clues may not
include any words, numerals, or verbal cues. All clues
must be done in silence. Team 1 will have 60 seconds to
guess the exact term. Team 2 members may watch but
cannot participate. If Team 1 guesses the term, they get
a point and Team 2 plays next.
3. Have a student from Team 2 come forward and select a new card from
the deck. The student will choose to draw or act out clues and the
team will have 60 seconds to guess the term. The same rules apply
as described above. If Team 2 guesses correctly, they get a point and
Team 1 gets the next turn. Continue in the same manner until all cards
have been used.
4. However, if a team doesn't guess the term, the other team may try to
take the point. This time, clues must be given in the opposite manner.
For example, if Team 1 had clues drawn for them and they fail to say
the term, Team 2 will act out the clues. If the clues were acted out first,
they now need to be drawn. If Team 2 guesses correctly, they get the
point. If they don't, no points are awarded. The next turn goes to Team
2 since Team 1 originally lost the opportunity to earn their point.
5. After all the cards have been used, the team with the most points
wins. If teams are tied for points, have a student from each team come
forward and show them the Tiebreaker Round 1 card. The student from
Team 1 will draw and the student from Team 2 will act out clues. Both
teams can play this round. The first team to guess the term wins. If no
one guesses the term, use the Tiebreaker Round 2 card. This time Team
1 will act out the clues and Team 2 will draw. The team that guesses
correctly wins the game.
mud Pic-A-Rade
natunil evil
suttering
pond
The Becaler Ram:
240 | CHAPTER 13
CHAPTER 13 | 241


<!-- page-11 (book p.13) -->

CH
13 Test P
Distribute TR 13.8 Chapter 13 Test to each student and allow
time for them to complete the exercises. Students who finish early
may start reading Chapter 14. Assign the homework.
Notes
Hell
242 | CHAPTER 13
