# Chapter 15

<!-- page-1 (book p.14) -->

CH
14 Test P
Distribute TR 14.8 Chapter 14 Test to each student and allow
time for them to complete the exercises. Students who finish early
may start reading Chapter 15. Assign the homework.
Notes
Slavery Racism,
land Violence in
the Bible
262 | CHAPTER 14


<!-- page-2 -->

Slavery, Racism, and
Violence in the Bible
Chapter 15 Syllabus
Lesson
4 In Class
Additional/alternate content
REVIEW
WATCH
REVIEW FOR
GIVE
Assignment
Chapter 14 Test
Questions for Chapter 15.1-15.2
Activity: The Big Picture
Chapter 15.3-15.4
Questions for Chapter 15.3-15.4
Questions for Chapter 15.3-15.4
Activity: Slavery Bible Study
Chapter 15.5-15.6
Questions for Chapter 15.5-15.6
Questions for Chapter 15.5-15.6
Activity: Philemon Sketches
Chapter 15.7-15.8
Questions for Chapter 15.7-15.8
Questions for Chapter 15.7-15.8
Activity: Language of Poetry
Chapter 15.9-15.10
Questions for Chapter 15.9-15.10
Questions for Chapter 15.9-15.10
Activity: Love Your Enemies
Videos
Video Questions
Video Questions
Activity: Fighting Slavery
Chapter 16.1-16.2
Questions for Chapter 16.1-16.2
STUDY FOR
Activity: Response Game
Study Guide Questions
Student Textbook (ST) Student Manual (SM)
264 | CHAPTER 15
Page
ST 246-249
SM 278
ST 249-252
SM 282-283
270-271
ST 252-255
SM 284
ST 255-259
SM 286
SM 288-289
276-278
ST 260-263
SM 294
TR 15.A
TR 15.SG
Chapter 15
OVERVIEW
The Bible is not a collection of children's
stories, godly character studies, or moral
precepts. It contains troubling passages
about violence, slavery, women, and
sexuality. Though most of these passages
appear in the Old Testament, some are
found in the New Testament. To understand
Scripture, it is vital to note the context of
biblical passages. This helps us differentiate
between descriptive passages (telling about
events in the lives of God's people, and
prescriptive ones (providing commands or
instructions for living wisely). Considering
the setting in which the Old Testament
was written may also reveal the redemptive
movement toward God's ideal.
Slavery, indentured servitude, and
human trafficking were widely practiced
in the Ancient Near East. Slavery was also
widespread in the Greco-Roman world
where the New Testament was written.
The Bible includes many instructions on
how to treat slaves. It even includes an
epistle, Philemon, sending a runaway slave
back to the slaveholder he had escaped.
In doing so, the letter provides the basis
for new relationships of radical equality in
Christ. God calls people to behave godly in
all circumstances, treating all people with
respect and equality.
The Bible also includes numerous
examples of violence. These include the
food, the slaughter of Israel's enemies
as God's people took over the Promised
Land, the imprecatory prayers in the book
of Psalms, the brutality Jesus suffered
during the crucifixion, and the destruction
described in Revelation. Upon close
examination, God's violence is not arbitrary
but rather a just and measured response to
evil. We can express our deepest feelings to
him, even rage at injustice, pain, and our
desires for retribution. We also see that Jesus'
self-giving love ethic is our calling today.
PREPARATION P
Lesson 1:
Students will bring the assigned
half sheet of paper with a detailed
picture or drawing of a person,
place, or object. Obtain scissors
and half a sheet of white paper per
student.
Lesson 2:
Print a copy of TR 15.2 Slavery
Bible Study Answer Key for every
student.
Lesson 4:
Print one copy of TR 15.4
Language of Poetry for every two
students in your class. Print a copy
of the answer key for yourself.
Lesson 5:
Preview PS 15.5 Love Your
Enemies to become familiar with
the activity.
Lasson 6:
Access and preview the videos
listed on Lesson 6. Video-streaming
instructions are on the inside back
cover of this manual.
Lesson 7:
Computers are needed for the
activity.
Make one copy of TR 15.8 Chapter
15 Test for each student.
LESSON MATERIALS
Presentation Slides
PS 15.5 Love Your Enemies
PS 15.7 Chapter 15 Review
Teacher Resources
TR 15.2 Slavery Bible Study Answer Key
TR 15.4 Language of Poetry
TR 15.SG Chapter 15 Study Guide
TR 15.8 Chapter 15 Test
TR 15.A Response Game
CHAPTER 15 | 265


<!-- page-3 (book p.1) -->

CH
Lesson 1:
15.1-15.2 P
Review Chapter 14 Test. Have
students turn to pages 243 in
their student textbook. Read the
objectives to the class. Go over
the answers to the Discussion
Questions for Chapter 15.1-15.2
on pages 276 in the student
manual. Have students turn
to Activity: The Big Picture.
Read the directions. Assign the
homework.
describe how Christians have
responded to the presence of
some troubling passages in
Scripture. [15.1]
examine the tools used in
determining whether biblical
passages on difficult topics
are descriptive or prescriptive.
[15.2]
© Have students read the article
Christianity & Rectifying
Justice, in the online Teacher
Resources.
266 CHAPTER 15
1. Are there any parts of Scripture that you find troubling?
Which parts, and why? [15.1]
Answers will vary.
2. What problems would arise if Christians abandoned the Old
Testament as Marcion did? [15.1]
Possible answer: Jesus regularly quoted the Old Testament
as authoritative, so doing away with it would, in some ways,
undermine the Gospels. Other parts of the New Testament quote
the Old Testament as well. We lose a significant part of Israel's story
if we abandon the Old Testament. As Jesus is the culmination of that
story, doing without the Old Testament would mean we would not
fully understand who Jesus is or why he came.
3. What is the difference between a descriptive passage and a
prescriptive passage? [15.2]
Descriptive passages describe events. They do not directly tell us
what we are to do or how we are to live. Prescriptive passages provide
specific instructions, commands, or indications. They state what
we, or the original audience, are supposed to do. Many prescriptive
passages are easy to interpret and apply; others can confuse modern
readers.
4. Why do you think there are so many descriptions of terrible
things in Scripture? [15.2]
Possible answer: One reason there are so many terrible things
described in the Bible is that it is a book for real people living in the
real world. The Bible is intensely realistic about the human situation
and doesn't shy away from pain or tragedy. Terrible things often
happen, but the Bible shows us how God is at work amid the chaos.
THE BIG PICTURE
Student will infer the
1. Have students bring in the assigned half sheet of
importance of context
paper they created and place it face down on their
in interpreting Scripture
desk. Remind students to not reveal their picture to
passages.
other students. It should have a detailed picture or
drawing of a person, place, or object that fills the
• Materials needed: assigned
half sheet of paper with a
detailed picture or drawing
of a person, place, or
object, scissors, and half
sheet of white paper
page. Distribute a new, blank half sheet of paper to
each student. Have students cut this half sheet of
paper into nine pieces, like a tic-tac-toe grid, and use
it to cover their drawing or picture.
2. Have students find a partner. Partners will take turns
removing one block from their partner's picture
to reveal a portion of the image underneath. After
removing a block, the partner will guess what the
image beneath is just by the context of the revealed
portion. Have partners continue to remove pieces
from one another's pictures and make guesses until
the content of the whole image is guessed or can
be seen. Guide students in discussing the following
questions:
• After seeing the image with only one block
removed, was your original guess correct?
• What were you basing your judgment on when you
could only see part of the whole picture?
• Why was it easier to guess what the image was
when more of the image was visible?
• How does this relate to the importance of context
in interpreting Bible passages?
CHAPTER 15 | 267


<!-- page-4 (book p.15) -->

CH
Lesson 2:
15.3-15.4 P
Read the objectives to the class.
for Chapter 15.3-15.4. Retrieve
the copies you made of TR 15.2
Slavery Bible Study Answer
Key. Have students turn to
Activity: Slavery Bible Study in
their student manual. Read the
• Students will be able to explain
how the context of a passage
may shed light on God's work
to redeem humankind. [15.3]
O Students will be able to
distinguish between slavery
and indentured servitude in
the Old Testament. [15.4]
268 | CHAPTER 15
1. What redemptive elements in Deuteronomy 21:10-14
demonstrate an improvement over the way captive women were
typically treated in ancient warfare? [15.3]
Redemptive elements in this passage include:
• Women were given a period of mourning. In other ancient cultures,
women were immediately violated. They had no mourning rights.
• An Israelite warrior was not permitted to violate a woman after
battle. He had to wait one month and then marry her if he was
going to sleep with her.
•If an Israelite warrior decided he did not want a captive woman
anymore, he had to let her go free. She could not be sold or treated
as a slave, as was common in other ancient cultures.
2. Why didn't God just command his ideal instead of helping his
people move toward it in small steps? [15.3]
Answers will vary, but may include:
•God did clearly state his ideal. The command "Love your neighbor
as yourself" was to shape the communal life of God's people.
•God moved people toward his ideal in small steps because making
change is often difficult. Sometimes, sweeping changes lead to
greater problems in the long run.
•God is a good pastor; he knows just how much change hard-
hearted people will tolerate at any given time. So, he moves them
slowly toward what is best.
3. Should Christians today apply every prescriptive passage in
the Bible? Explain. [15.3]
In studying a prescriptive passage in the Bible, we consider who
it was written to and for what purpose. Because we live in a
different context than the original audience, our application may
look different from how they would apply the instructions in the
prescriptive passage. For example, the instructions in Deuteronomy
21:10-14 applied to Israel at a particular point in their history.
Today, we would apply the spirit of this passage by working for
better treatment of people in vulnerable situations.
4. How were Israel's practices around indentured servitude and
slavery an improvement over indentured servitude and slavery in
the Ancient Near East? [15.4]
Both Israel and its neighbors practiced forms of indentured servitude
and slavery. God's rules provided significant protection for slaves
and indentured servants compared to how they were treated in
other cultures of the Ancient Near East. Slaves and indentured
servants were not to be mistreated or abused, and slaveholders were
held responsible for their actions. Israelites were forbidden from
participating in human trafficking. God also instructed Israel to treat
foreigners justly and to harbor runaway slaves from other nations.
SLAVERY BIBLE STUDY
Students will consider Old
1. Direct students to use their Bible to answer the
Testament commands
questions. Students may choose to work with a
about slavery and how
partner.
these relate to the
2. Have student volunteers share their answers.
individual stories of Hagar
Use the TR 15.2 Slavery Bible Study Answer Key
and Joseph.
to review the answers as needed.
• Materials needed: TR 15.2,
Bible, and pen
25-30 minutes
Note: The commands about slavery in Leviticus and
Deuteronomy were given to the Israelites long after Hagar and
Joseph lived. Therefore, Abraham, Sarah, and Joseph's family
had not been given these rules, though they knew God's
character and morality through general revelation and their
own experiences with him.
CHAPTER 15 | 269


<!-- page-5 (book p.15) -->

CH
Lesson 3:
15.5-15.6
Read the objectives to the
class. Go over the Discussion
Questions for Chapter 15.5-15.6.
Have students turn to Activity:
Philemon Sketches in their
student manual. Read the
summarize what the New
Testament teaches about
slavery. [15.5]
evaluate passages in Scripture
that show violence brought
about by God. [15.6]
• Have students read the article
The Christian's Freedom, by
Timothy Fox, in the online
Teacher Resources.
270 | CHAPTER 15
1. Why do you think Paul didn't command Philemon to set
Onesimus free? [15.5]
Paul was likely aware that even if Philemon freed Onesimus,
a freed slave in the Greco-Roman world wouldn't have many survival
options. Perhaps Paul did not suggest Philemon free Onesimus
because he was more interested in changing their relationship from
master and slave to that of siblings in Christ's family. He may have
desired them to set an example of reconciliation for the whole
church. Paul may also have wanted Philemon to see Onesimus as a
human being, equal in Christ.
2. What is so significant about Paul using familial language
about Onesimus? [15.5]
In the Greco-Roman world, family ties were sacred. They imply
mutual trust, respect, and responsibility toward one another. Using
terms like son and brother, Paul radically changed the basis of
Philemon and Onesimus relationship.
3. How does New Testament teaching undermine slavery and
racism? [15.5]
Christ came to set captives free. He provides a radically new basis for
equality between all individuals—Jew and Gentile, slave and free,
men and women. The New Testament writers issued several calls for
unity. Furthermore, God does not show partiality. He commanded
that the gospel be taken all over the world to every people. This is
the ideal represented in Revelation, when people from every nation,
tribe, and tongue worship around God's throne.
4. What were God's reasons for destroying the earth with a flood?
[15.6]
God brought the flood because the earth had become so corrupt that
people were entirely absorbed in evil. Creation was being torn apart,
and it needed a fresh start. God brought the flood to bring judgment
and to help creation get back on track.
5. Is God's grief over sin consistent with his judgment on sin?
Explain. [15.6]
While some believe it is inconsistent for God to grieve over sin while
also judging them for their sin, these two actions are not opposed to
one another. If God is love, he must bring judgment on the evil that
is tearing creation apart. Otherwise, he is not loving but indifferent.
God is portrayed in Scripture as a reluctant judge who grieves when
people turn away from what is good.
6. How does Christ win the victory over his enemies in the book
of Revelation? [15.6]
In Revelation, Christ is portrayed as the slaughtered Lamb. The primary way in
which he wins the victory is through giving up his own life on the cross.
PHILEMON SKETCHES
Students will create
1. Divide the class into four groups. Allow groups a few
skits employing their
minutes to read through Philemon's letter in the Bible
understanding of
to observe characters, setting and the message.
Philemon's cultural
2. Assign one of the following to each group:
context to further explore
• Group 1: Onesimus' conversion and discipleship
the book's content and
when in jail with Paul
message.
• Group 2: Paul's convincing Onesimus to return
• Materials needed: Bible
25-30 minutes
to Philemon
• Group 3: Philemon's reaction when Onesimus
returned
• Group 4: Philemon's household, church, and
community reacting to the reunion
3. Allow students five minutes to discuss and prepare a
two-minute skit demonstrating their understanding
of Philemon's culture and the importance of
understanding the cultural setting when examining the
book's message.
4. Have each group present their assigned skit to the class.
5. If time permits, discuss the skits.
CHAPTER 15 | 271


<!-- page-6 (book p.15) -->

CH
Lesson 4:
15.7-15.8
Read the objectives to the class.
for Chapter 15.7-15.8. Retrieve
the copies you made of TR
15.4 Language of Poetry and
have students turn to Activity:
Language of Poetry in their
student manual. Read the
evaluate factors related to the
violence God commanded
in the conquest of Canaan.
[15.7]
• Students will be able to defend
the presence of imprecatory
psalms in Scripture. [15.8]
mD Language of Poctry
272 | CHAPTER 15
1. Was the conquest of Canaan ethnically motivated? Explain.
[15.7]
The conquest of Canaan was not ethnically motivated. God does
not show partiality to any particular ethnicity, and he doesn't play
favorites. God chose Israel out of love to be a blessing to other
nations, not because Israel was culturally or morally superior. God
brought judgment on the Canaanites because of their sin. God also
brought judgment on Israel when they turned away from him.
2. What was the primary motivation for the conquest of Canaan?
How would this conquest likely be accomplished? [15.7]
The primary motivation for the conquest of Canaan was religious-
to rid the land of idolatry. This would mean tearing down the places
of Canaanite worship, killing the Canaanite kings, and taking out
major strongholds of military power.
3. How are imprecatory psalms different from hate speech?
[15.8]
Hate speech today is commonly defined as language that targets and
incites violence toward a particular group of people or individuals
based on things like race, religion, or gender. The imprecatory
psalms are prayers explicitly directed to God, not others. They are
honest expressions of grief and rage offered up by those who have
experienced terrible suffering or oppression at the hands of the
wicked.
4. Why is it significant that the psalmists directed their prayers of
rage to God: [15.8]
Vengeance belongs to God alone, and only he is fully capable of
dealing out justice impartially. By directing their prayers to God, the
psalmists take their rage to the only one who can deal with it fairly.
Instead of taking vengeance on their enemies, the psalmists put the
matter into God's hands and leave it to him to do what is right.
LANGUAGE OF POETRY
Students will contrast
1. Ask students to name literary devices. List the
the literary devices from
devices on the board. The list may include similes,
various poems to those
metaphors, alliteration, allusion, personification,
found in Scripture.
synecdoche, and more. Remind students that
imprecatory psalms use bold imagery.
2. Have students work in pairs. Distribute one copy
• Materials needed:
of TR 15.4 Language of Poetry to each pair. Assign
TR 15.4, Bible, and pen
a poem to each pair and direct pairs to identify the
literary devices used in their poem. Students may
write on their copy of TR 15.4.
3. After a few minutes, have student pairs choose a
psalm from among the following: 1, 3, 4, 15, 47, 52,
or 61. Pairs are to identify the literary devices used
in their psalm. Students may use the back of TR 15.4
for their notes.
4. As time allows, have students share their findings
with the class or with another pair. Refer to the
answer key to support discussion.
CHAPTER 15


<!-- page-7 (book p.15) -->

CH
Lesson 5:
Chapter P
15.9-15.10
Read the objective to the class.
for Chapter 15.9-15.10. Have
students turn to Activity: Love
Your Enemies in their student
manual. Have PS 15.5 Love
Your Enemies available. Read the
directions. (Optional) Assign TR
15.SG Chapter 15 Study Guide
to prepare for Chapter 15 Test.
OBJECTIVE
O Students will be able to
appraise the Bible's portrayal of
violence by and toward Jesus.
[15.9]
ENRICHMENT ACTIVITY
© Use TR 15.A Activity:
Response Game in class for
an additional or alternate class
activity.
274 | CHAPTER 15
1. What do Jesus' aggressive actions tell us about God? [15.9]
Jesus' aggressive words and actions regarding those who did evil
show us that God is not indifferent or unconcerned with evil. He
takes it very seriously, and he will eventually bring judgment.
2. What was Jesus' primary way of dealing with evil in the world?
[15.9]
As God himself, Jesus might at any time have called down fire on
his enemies or summoned an army to destroy the Romans. Instead,
Jesus urged love of enemies, forgiveness, and prayer for those who
persecute us. Instead of calling us to pick up swords, he calls us to
pick up the cross. Jesus dealt with evil on the cross by suffering the
worst that evil could do and ultimately defeating it through his
self-giving love.
3. How would you respond to the charge, "The cross is cosmic
child abuse"? [15.9]
Calling the cross cosmic child abuse suggests that the Father forcibly
put the Son to death because he needed to take out his wrath on
somebody. Yet, Scripture shows that God's wrath is not arbitrary. It
also teaches that Jesus went to the cross willingly. Calling the cross
cosmic child abuse also suggests that the Father and the Son are two
different gods. Scripture shows that God is a Trinity, three Persons in
one God, united in their purpose to redeem humanity. This means
that the God angry at sin is the same God who paid for that sin on
the cross.
4. Do biblical passages about violence, slavery, or racism
condone such actions today? Explain. [15.10]
No, they do not. In reading such passages, paying attention to the
context is important. The passages about slavery and violence we
surveyed in this chapter applied in highly specific contexts but are
not to be applied in the same way today. The church is called to
share in Christ's victory through laying down our lives for the sake of
the gospel. The church as a body should never collectively engage in
acts of violence and should seek to help bring an end to racism and
slavery in all its forms.
LOVE YOUR ENEMIES
Students will examine
1. Display PS 15.5 Love Your Enemies. Have student
how the apostles and
volunteers take turns reading slides aloud.
the early church upheld
2. Have students read the quotations from slides
Jesus' teachings on loving,
6-10 and note how the apostles and the early
forgiving, and praying for
church applied Jesus' teachings on loving,
enemies.
forgiving, and praying for enemies.
3. After reading through the presentation, facilitate
class discussion and invite students to share their
• Materials needed: PS 15.5,
comments.
paper, and pen
CHAPTER 15 |
5 Slavery, Racism, and Violence in the Bible


<!-- page-8 (book p.15) -->

CH
Lesson 6:
Videos P
Students will view four videos
featuring Christian educators and
authors in this lesson. Each expert
answers a specific worldview or
apologetics question. These videos
will allow students to expand their
knowledge and provide biblical
answers to thought-provoking
questions. The following videos
will be used in today's lesson:
1. What Is God's Judgment?
(Copan, 3:55)
2. Is Old Testament Violence Just?
(Copan, 4:52)
3. Genocide in the Old
Testament? (Copan, 3:30)
4. Slavery in the Old Testament
(Copan, 5:57)
Play the videos one at a time in
the order listed above. Before each
video, direct students to read the
questions associated with that
video in their student manual
so they know what to listen for.
During and after the video has
been shown, students should write
their answers to the Discussion
Questions. It may be necessary to
play the video again so students
can answer all the questions.
Go over the questions for the
first video. Play the next video.
Continue in this manner until
the last video has been played and
questions have been discussed.
276 | CHAPTER 15
• Video 1:
What Is God's Judgment?
1. What is the first thing the speaker says we need to keep in
mind when we consider whether God is a vindictive bully, as
atheist Richard Dawkins put it?
God is fundamentally a God of love. From eternity, the Father, Son,
and Holy Spirit have been together in a loving relationship.
2. Love is
from God's love.
primary ; wrath is _
secondary and springs
3. What did theologian Miroslav Volf believe about God?
He believed there couldn't be such a thing as a God of wrath. He felt
wrath was beneath God.
4. What term did the speaker use instead of wrath? Why?
Passion. God is passionate about humans mistreating others; he
wants to step in and say, "Enough is enough," and to act with
severity against those who harm others.
5. Why can we be thankful for God's wrath and judgments?
We can be thankful because they guarantee that cosmic justice will
be done, that people will not get away with murder and more, and
that everything will be set right in the end.
• Video 2:
Is Old Testament Violence Just?
1. What is the first distinction the speaker says we must consider
when thinking about the violence in the Old Testament?
God is never described as violent. Violence involves evil, injustice,
and criminal activity by humans. So, when God acts, he responds to
what is already occurring.
2. What distinction does the speaker make between violence and
coercive force:
He says that all violence is coercive force, but not all coercive force is
violent.
3. What examples does the speaker give of appropriate places for coercive
force in society?
The speaker talks about just policing-stopping perpetrators from doing their
worst. He also talks about just war—protecting civilians in war when we have
the resources to do so.
4. How is violence different from just war?
Violence is different from just war in that it is not principled. It is not pursuing
justice but is done to terrorize and bring harm to others.
5. What responsibilities does the government have, according to the speaker?
The government is responsible for preserving the peace, punishing the guilty,
and protecting the innocent.
• Video 3:
Genocide in the Old Testament?
1. According to the speaker, did God command genocide in the Old
Testament?
The speaker says that God did not command genocide. Though Israel was told
to destroy the Canaanites, the reason was not their ethnicity, genetics, or tribal
issue, but their wickedness.
2. Did God warn the Canaanites of his coming judgment?
Yes, the Canaanites had more than 500 years' warning.
3. What does the speaker say we should notice about the language in these
commands?
The speaker says it's an exaggeration, sweeping language, hyperbolic, and not
literal. This is standard Ancient Near East trash talk, as we have in sports today.
4. What is unique about the Bible's account compared to other ancient Near
Eastern ones?
The Bible's account is more realistic. It says that people survived, so the Israelites
did not kill everything that breathed.
5. Why did God bring judgment on the Canaanites?
God brought judgment on the Canaanites because they were guilty of heinous
sins like incest, bestiality, ritual sacrifice, prostitution, and other criminal and
corrupting behavior.
6. What did God's judgment accomplish for the Israelites?
By enacting God's judgment, the Israelites got their own land, with the warning
from God that if they sinned, they, too, would be exiled from the land.
APOLOGETICS 5
CHAPTER 15 | 277


<!-- page-9 (book p.15) -->

CH
Videos
(continued)
• Video 4:
Slavery in the Old Testament
1. How was the slavery described in the Old Testament different from
pre-Civil War slavery in the United States?
According to the speaker, slavery in the Old Testament was different in that
it encompassed indentured servitude, where a person would choose to serve
someone else for a limited period.
2. What did the speaker say about the Hebrew term ebed?
The speaker said this term, meaning slave, is often better translated as servant.
It is not inherently negative; it can be positive, as in the phrase "servant
of the Lord."
3. What were some of the protocols and prohibitions of slavery in Israel?
Kidnapping was forbidden. Israelites would serve only briefly, unless they
decided to serve longer. Foreign runaway slaves were allowed to settle in
Israelite cities.
Lesson 7:
and
Review P
Have students turn to Activity:
Fighting Slavery in their student
manual. Read the directions.
Then, display PS 15.7R Chapter
15 Review to help students
review the concepts in Chapter
15. Allow students to discuss
chapter concepts, take notes, and
use TR 15.SG Chapter 15 Study
guide as needed.
CHAPTER 15 REVIEW
Key Terms
Ancient Near East
slavery
indentured servitude
human trafficking
genocide
ethnocentrism
imprecatory psalms
Key Verses
Exodus 21:16
Deuteronomy 23:15-16
Leviticus 19:33-34
Colossians 3:11
Acts 10:34-35
FIGHTING SLAVERY
Students will research Christian figures who fought
or who are fighting slavery and human trafficking.
• Materials needed: computer, paper, and pen
• Time required: 25-30 minutes
1. Divide the class into seven groups. Assign each
group one of the names listed below.
• William Wilbertorce
• Elizabeth Freeman
• Hannah More
• Laura Parker/The Exodus Road
• Olaudah Equiano
• Elijah Lovejoy
• Gary Haugen/International Justice Mission
2. Have groups research how the person they were
assigned fought or is fighting slavery or human
trafficking. Inform students they have up to eight
minutes to complete their research.
3. Have each group present its findings to the class.
Each presentation must take two minutes or
less so all groups can participate. (If desired, you
can provide more research time and allow for
longer presentations by having groups share their
research with only one other group rather than
with the whole class.)
savery, Racism. and vio
in the Bible
CHAPTER 15 |
ZIO CHAPIER 15


<!-- page-10 (book p.15) -->

CH
15 Test P
Distribute TR 15.8 Chapter 15 Test to each student and allow
time for them to complete the exercises. Students who finish early
may start reading Chapter 16. Assign the homework.
Notes
The Body,
Human Sexuality,
and the Bible
280 | CHAPTER 15
