# Chapter 16

<!-- page-1 (book p.15) -->

CH
15 Test P
Distribute TR 15.8 Chapter 15 Test to each student and allow
time for them to complete the exercises. Students who finish early
may start reading Chapter 16. Assign the homework.
Notes
The Body,
Human Sexuality,
and the Bible
280 | CHAPTER 15


<!-- page-2 -->

The Body, Human
Sexuality, and the Bible
Chapter 16 Syllabus
Lesson
REVIEW
WATCH
REVIEW FOR
GIVE
Assignment
Chapter 15 Test
Questions for Chapter 16.1-16.2
Activity: Worldview Revolution
Chapter 16.3-16.4
Questions for Chapter 16.3-16.4
Questions for Chapter 16.3-16.4
Activity: Authentic Values
Chapter 16.5-16.6
Questions for Chapter 16.5-16.6
Questions for Chapter 16.5-16.6
Activity: Biblical Sexuality Bible Study
Chapter 16.7-16.8
Questions for Chapter 16.7-16.8
Questions for Chapter 16.7-16.8
Activity: Defending God's Good Design
Chapter 16.9-16.10
Questions for Chapter 16.9-16.10
Questions for Chapter 16.9-16.10
Activity: Grace and Truth
Videos
Video Questions
Video Questions
Activity: Identify Me
Chapter 17.1-17.2
Questions for Chapter 17.1-17.2
Additional/alternate content
STUDY FOR
Activity: Family of God
Chapter 16 Study Guide
Student Textbook (ST) Student Manual (SM)
282 | CHAPTER 16
Page
ST 263-266
SM 297
ST 266-269
SM 300
ST 269-272
SM 304
ST 272-277
SM 306
SM 308-309
294-295
296-297
ST 278-281
SM 314
PS 16.A, TR 16.A
TR 16.SG
Chapter 16
OVERVIEW
Followers of Christ are called to speak the
truth with love about God's design for the
body, sex, gender, and marriage. The rise
of technology and postmodernism has
disconnected the concept of the self from
the body. Our culture now views truth as
subjective, the self as inner experiences,
sexual desires as essential to human identity,
and moral restraint as oppressive. This has
amplified struggles with gender dysphoria
and same-sex attraction.
Human beings were created in God's
image as embodied souls who are limited,
valuable, and personal. Our created limits
help us flourish, and our physical bodies
are part of our identity. We are body and
soul. Human beings are also created with
a bodily sex, male or female. Marriage is
a one-flesh union and an interdependent
lifelong covenantal relationship between one
man and one woman before God. Marriage
unites couples as persons and points to the
reality of Christ and the church. Male and
female bodies are sexually oriented toward
the opposite sex and creating new life
together. Biblically, sexual orientation and
gender identity are defined by our bodily
design, not our feelings.
Sin, shame, pain and suffering,
dysphoria, and death resulted from the
fall. Because of this, we are broken in our
body and soul. Every kind of sexual sin
and brokenness results from the fall. We
cannot resolve them in our own strength;
God resolves them for us through the
incarnation, life, death, and resurrection
of Jesus. Christians are empowered to flee
temptation and are promised complete
restoration at Christ's second coming. Until
then, the church serves the sexually broken
by living like the family of God, listening
and encouraging, and pointing others
toward our ultimate hope in this life and the
next-Jesus Christ.
© The Body, Human Sexuality, and the Bible
PREPARATION P
Lesson 1:
Preview PS 16.1 Worldview
Revolution to prepare for the
activity.
Lesson 2:
Print one copy of TR 16.2
Authentic Values Analysis
Answers.
Lesson 3:
Make one copy of TR 16.3 Biblical
Sexuality Study Answer Key for
yourself.
Lesson 4:
Make five copies of TR 16.4 God's
Good Design Chart. Keep one copy
of the Answer Key for yourself.
Lesson 5:
Make one copy of TR 16.5 Grace
and Truth Conversation Map for
every two students. Access and
preview the videos listed in the
lesson. Optional: Make a copy of
TR 16.SG Chapter 16 Study Guide
for every student; make a copy of
the Answer Key for yourself.
Lesson 6:
Access and preview the videos
listed in Lesson 6. See the inside
back cover of this manual for
instructions on how to stream
videos.
Lesson 7:
Cut one piece of blank white paper
in half for each student.
Make one copy of TR 16.8 Chapter
16 Test for each student.
LESSON MATERIALS
Presentation Slides
PS 16.1 Worldview Revolution
PS 16.7 Chapter 16 Review
PS 16.A Family of God
Teacher Resources
TR 16.2 Authentic Values Analysis Answers
TR 16.3 Biblical Sexuality Study Answer Key
TR 16.4 God's Good Design Chart
TR 16.5 Grace and Truth Conversation Map
TR 16.SG Chapter 16 Study Guide
TR 16.8 Chapter 16 Test
TR 16.A Family of God
CHAPTER 16 | 283


<!-- page-3 (book p.16) -->

CH
Lesson 1:
16.1-16.2
P
Have students turn to page
260 in their student textbook.
Review Chapter 15 Test. Have
students answer the Discussion
Questions on page 294 in
their student manual. Go over
the Discussion Questions for
Chapter 16.1-16.2. Have
students turn to Activity:
Worldview Revolution. Have
PS 16.1 Worldview Revolution
available. Read the directions.
Assign the homework.
© Students will be able to
communicate the importance
of the biblical view of sex and
gender with truth and love.
[16.1]
explain the ways technology
and postmodernism have
influenced the rise of sexual
brokenness and gender
dysphoria. [16.2]
© Have students read the article
Sacred Intimacy: Exploring
Sexuality Through a
Biblical Lens, Stand Strong
Ministries, in the online
Teacher Resources.
284 | CHAPTER 16
1. How often do conversations about sexuality and gender come
up among your friends or family? What are those conversations
like? [16.1]
Answers will vary.
2. Why is it important for Christians to be gracious when
presenting biblical truth about sexual ethics and LGBTQ-related
issues? [16.1]
Christians need to be gracious because conversations surrounding
LGBTQ issues can cause people to react strongly to statements
they disagree with. These tensions often leave the real suffering of
people struggling with same-sex attraction or gender dysphoria
unaddressed. Because the Great Commission calls Christians to
serve others and share the gospel (as we learned in Chapter 4), it's
important to show grace to others.
3. How could a person's worldview contribute to them accepting
or rejecting the Bible's teachings about sexuality? [16.2]
The postmodern worldview teaches that we create our own meaning
and identity. So, if someone thinks that finding personal fulfillment
is the ultimate goal, he or she will think it's cruel to say people
shouldn't become transgender or have a romantic relationship with
someone of the same sex. People who believe that any consensual
romantic and sexual relationship is okay may feel it's judgmental,
bigoted, or rude to tell consenting adults they shouldn't do
something.
4. How has technology changed how we think about ourselves,
especially our bodies? How do you see the effects of this in your
own life? [16.2]
Answers will vary but should include: Technology makes it easy to
think that our real self is separate from our bodies. We believe the
inner self counts and that our bodies dont really matter.
WORLDVIEW REVOLUTION
Students will be able to
biblically analyze the
ideas of philosophers
who influenced the sexual
revolution.
• Materials needed:
PS 16.1, Bible, and pen
20-25 minutes
1. Display slide 1 of PS 16.1 Worldview Revolution and
have a volunteer read the introduction. Divide the
class into four groups and assign each group one of
the following philosophers.
• Jean-Jacques Rousseau
• Sigmund Freud
• Wilhelm Reich
• Simone de Beauvoir
2. Display slide 2 and direct groups to use the
philosopher information and Bible verses on the slide
to complete Worldview Revolution in their student
manual.
3. Have groups share their answers for the first set of
boxes in their analysis chart with the class. Reveal the
answers on slide 3.
4. Follow the same procedure for the next two sets
of boxes using slides 4 and 5. Have students share
their responses to the short answer question in the
analysis.
5. Display slide 6 and review the answer on the slide.
Discuss the following question:
• Ideas have consequences. What are some of the
consequences of these unbiblical philosophies
about sex and sexuality today? Answers will vary.
CHAPTER 16


<!-- page-4 (book p.16) -->

CH
Lesson 2:
16.3-16.4 p
16.3-16.4. Have students turn
to Activity: Authentic Values
in their student manual. Have
one copy of TR 16.2 Authentic
Values Analysis Answer Key
available for yourself. Read the
directions. Assign the homework.
• Students will be able to defend
the truth about God's good
design and purpose for human
beings. [16.3]
correlate why human beings
are sexed creatures and the
purpose of marriage. [16.4]
© Have students read the article
He Made Them Male and
Female by Christopher
Yuan, in the online Teacher
Resources.
286 | CHAPTER 16
1. What does it mean that human beings are embodied souls?
[16.3]
Being embodied souls means that human beings are both body and
soul. A person is not just a body; a person is not simply a soul. To be
human fundamentally means being both body and soul.
2. What are four things we need to understand about our bodies?
Briefly describe them. [16.3]
Our bodies are created, limited, valuable, and personal. God created
us; we are not our own creators. This means that we are also limited.
There are things we can and cannot do. We are also made in the
image of God, which means we are inherently valuable in both our
body and soul. Finally, our bodies are personal. This means that they
are an essential part of our identity. Humans are always embodied,
whether in their created, fallen, or resurrected states.
3. Why does what we do with our bodies matter? [16.3]
What we do with our bodies affects us physically and emotionally.
Sinning with our hearts can hurt our bodies as well as our souls, and
sinning with our bodies hurts our bodies and souls. The Bible tells us
to flee sin. This includes sins we do with our bodies, such as sexual
immorality. Our bodies are meant to be used to worship God, and as
Christians, we are called to present our bodies as a living sacrifice.
4. What does it mean that human beings are sexed beings? [16.4]
Our physical bodies are created to be sexed as male or female. Our
bodily, or biological, sex consists of the physical attributes that code
our bodies as male or female. Biological sex is part of our design.
Biological sex is deeply connected to our humanity.
5. What is marriage, and what is the purpose of marriage? [16.4]
God created marriage to be a lifelong covenantal relationship
between one man and one woman and a one-flesh union. Sexual
differentiation is essential to becoming one flesh physically through
the act of sex. Male and female bodies are interdependent and
biologically oriented toward creating children together. Becoming
one in marriage also includes building a deep emotional and spiritual
bond. Most importantly, marriage points to the union between
Christ and the church and calls us into a deeper relationship with
Christ.
AUTHENTIC VALUES
Students will demonstrate
1. Divide the class into four groups. Assign each group
how the biblical design
one of the postmodern values below.
of the self is better for
• Group 1: Rejecting limits on the self
human flourishing than
—Psalm 139:14; Matthew 7:13-14; John 15:5;
postmodern values.
1 Corinthians 6:12-13, 18
• Group 2: Rejecting authority over the self
—Proverbs 3:5-8; Colossians 2:8-10
• Materials needed:
•Group 3: Self-creating meaning and purpose
-Genesis 2:15; Luke 9:23; John 15:15-16;
TR 16.2, Bible, and pen
1 Corinthians 6:19-20; 1 Peter 2:9
20-25 minutes
•Group 4: Self-defining personal identity
-Genesis 1:27; John 1:12; 2 Corinthians 5:17;
Galatians 2:20; Ephesians 2:3, 4:22-24
2. Have a student volunteer read Matthew 7:24-27
aloud. Explain that some parables or analogies,
like Jesus' analogy of people who built houses on
different foundations, contrast a good model versus
a broken model for how to live.
3. Direct groups to read the Bible verses next to their
assigned postmodern value. Have them answer the
questions in Authentic Values and create a short
analogy or parable to contrast the postmodern value
with biblical teachings.
4. Have groups share their answers with the class. Use
TR 16.2 Authentic Values Analysis Answer Key to help
you guide the discussion.
CHAPTER 16 | 287


<!-- page-5 (book p.16) -->

CH
Lesson 3:
16.5-16.6 P
16.5-16.6. Have students turn to
Activity: Biblical Sexuality Bible
Study in their student manual.
Have a copy of TR 16.3 Biblical
Sexuality Study Answer Key
available for yourself. Read the
directions. Assign the homework.
O Students will be able to explain
the ways the fall affects the
body and soul. [16.5]
O Students will be able to
contrast the current cultural
understanding of sex and
gender with the biblical view.
[16.6]
» Biblical Scality Bible Study - Answer Ke
| CHAPTER 16
1. How did the fall impact human nature and our physical
bodies? [16.5]
Because the first humans rebelled against God, we all have a corrupt
nature and broken bodies. We aren't morally perfect or physically
whole. We are still image-bearers but are deeply flawed and broken.
The fall introduced sin, shame, pain and suffering, dysphoria,
and death.
2. Why do some people view the biblical sexual ethic as bad,
unfair, or wrong? [16.6]
Possible answer: Technology has made us less connected to our
bodies, and postmodernism has taught us that we create our own
truth and identity. So, physical and moral limits feel bad. They stop
us from doing everything we want and being in total control of our
lives. Because the Christian sexual ethic prioritizes our design and
God's authority instead of our inner feelings, some people view the
Christian sexual ethic as unfair and even oppressive.
3. What is the biblical view of sexual orientation and gender
identity? [16.6]
The biblical view of sexual orientation is centered around our
biological design, not our feelings. Because our biological design
is sexually oriented toward the opposite sex, then our sexual
orientation is by nature toward the opposite sex. Similarly, our
gender is linked to our bodily sex. They can't be separated. Feelings
of same-sex attraction or gender dysphoria can't cancel out the
truth about our bodies.
BIBLICAL SEXUALITY BIBLE STUDY
Students will analyze the
1. Have students work with a partner. Direct them
biblical metanarrative's
to use their Bibles to complete Biblical Sexuality
teachings on sexual ethics.
Bible Study in their student manual.
. Have the class discuss their answers. Use TR 16.3
Biblical Sexuality Study Answer Key as needed.
• Materials needed: TR 16.3,
Bible, and pen
25-30 minutes
CHAPTER 16 | 289


<!-- page-6 (book p.16) -->

CH
Lesson 4:
16.7-16.8 p
16.7-16.8. Direct students to
turn to Activity: Defending
God's Good Design in their
student manual. Have copies of
TR 16.4 God's Good Design
Chart available. Keep a copy
of the Answer Key for yourself.
Read the directions. Assign the
homework.
categorize ways the fall affects
human sexual brokenness.
[16.7]
O Students will be able to express
why the gospel is good news
for the sexually broken. [16.8]
© Have students read the
article 7 Lies Christians
Believe About Sex, by Frank
Powell, in the online Teacher
Resources.
* God's Good Desien Charl
290 | CHAPTER 16
DISCUSSION DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. How does self-centeredness relate to sexual brokenness? [16.7]
Because of the fall, people are selfish. It's easy to worship the
self instead of God. When someone worships the self, sexuality
becomes more about personal pleasure and fulfillment than caring
about other people. It becomes more about getting than giving.
Rebelling against God results in devaluing our bodies. This results in
brokenness for everyone involved.
2. How can understanding the nature of temptation help us care
for people struggling with same-sex attraction, gender dysphoria,
or other sexual desires that go against God's design and purpose?
[16.7]
Possible answer: Understanding that temptation is part of the
human experience in a broken world helps us show grace. Since
even Jesus experienced temptation (though he didn't sin), we know
experiencing temptations doesn't mean we're automatically in sin.
As Christians, we have a choice to give into temptation or resist it
in the power of the Holy Spirit. We all need God's grace to refuse
to act on sinful thoughts and feelings.
3. What does it mean to say, "God doesn't leave us in our sexual
brokenness; he resolves it for us"? [16.8]
Jesus' incarnation, death, and resurrection mean that Jesus
understands our limits and brokenness. He provides a way for us to
be redeemed and restored, body and soul. Finally, Jesus' redemption
empowers us to flee temptation, strive against sin, receive forgiveness,
and embrace the entire truth of who God has made us to be.
4. As Christians, should we define ourselves by our temptations?
Does struggling with a particular temptation mean someone isn't
a Christian? Explain. [16.8]
As Christians, we should not identify ourselves by our temptations
because our identity is in Christ and our sin and brokenness have
an expiration date. One day, we will be fully restored. Experiencing
particular temptations doesn't mean someone isn't a Christian.
Battling with temptation and sin is something all Christians will
continue to experience until we see Jesus face-to-face.
DEFENDING GOD'S GOOD DESIGN
Students will defend the biblical
• Materials needed: TR 16.4, student
view of sex, gender, and marriage.
textbook, Bible, and pen
• Time: 25-30 minutes
PROCEDURES:
1. Divide the class into four groups. Distribute one copy of TR 16.4 God's Good Design
Chart to each group and assign one biblical position to defend to each group.
•Position 1: Human beings are created male or female with distinctive, observable
biological differences.
• Position 2: Men and women have equal dignity before God-having bodily sex
differences does not diminish the dignity and worth of either male or female.
• Position 3: God doesn't forbid sex outside of monogamous male/female marriage
for our harm but for our flourishing.
• Position 4: Marriage is designed to be a physical and spiritually significant covenant
bond between a man and a woman.
2. Direct groups to use their student textbook and Bible to find support for their assigned
position. Supporting evidence may come from biblical texts, applying logical argument
structures learned in Chapter 6.2-6.3, or scientific evidence mentioned in the student
text. Bible references in the student text may provide a helpful starting point for finding
biblical evidence. Have groups record their findings in their chart.
3. Have groups share their answers. Discuss the following question with the class:
• What would society look like if everyone followed the biblical model for sex, gender,
and marriage?
Possible answers: If everyone followed God's design for sex and marriage, there
would be almost no abortions, almost no sexual abuse or sexual violence, almost
no custody battles due to divorce, almost no STIs spreading (unless passed
down to some children during childbirth), less crime since there would be less
fatherlessness, less poverty, no hookup culture, no pornography addiction, no
human trafficking, likely higher rates of happiness, and more loving and respectful
dating and marriage relationships.
CHAPTER 16 | 291
APOLOGETICS 9


<!-- page-7 (book p.16) -->

CH
Lesson 5:
Chapter P
16.9-16.10
Read the objective to the class.
16.9-16.10. Have students turn
to Activity: Grace and Truth
in their student manual. Have
one copy of TR 16.5 Grace
and Truth Conversation Map
available for each pair of students
and one Answer Key for yourself.
Read the directions. Direct
students to complete the exercise.
Optional: Assign TR 16.SG
Chapter 16 Study Guide to
prepare for Chapter 16 Test.
OBJECTIVE
• Students will be able to give
examples of ways the church
can minister to those hurt
by sexual and biological
brokenness. [16.9]
ENRICHMENT ACTIVITY
© Use TR 16.A Activity:
Family of God in class for an
additional or alternate class
activity,
| CHAPTER 16
1. Why is providing community such an essential part of caring
for everyone, but especially singles and people struggling with
sexual brokenness, within the church? [16.9]
Possible answer: Providing church community is important because
we are family in Christ. So, we need to support and encourage
each other. Single people may feel forgotten in church programs or
groups, so it's important to be intentional about inviting them into
the broader community. This means walking through life together.
People struggling with sexual brokenness need to receive discipleship
and loving support as they pursue Christ.
2. What are some ways you can help loved ones who are
struggling with sexuality or gender, whether they are Christians
or non-Christians? [16.9]
Answers will vary but may include: I can listen well, be a safe person,
thank them for sharing, and ask thoughtful questions. If I'm talking
to a Christian, I can remind them of biblical truths, reassure them of
God's love and my love, encourage them to pursue Christ, and help
them get spiritual guidance. If a non-Christian asks me about the
Christian view of sex and gender, I can focus on the gospel and share
the context of sexuality within God's big story.
3. How has understanding sexuality and gender within the
biblical metanarrative helped you think about these topics, and
how could it help you share Christian convictions more clearly
and graciously with those who disagree? [16.9]
Answers will vary.
GRACE AND TRUTH
Students will chart a conversation
between a Christian and someone
with mistaken beliefs about the
Christian view of sex and gender.
• Materials needed: TR 16.5; videos:
Evangelizing to LGBT+ People
(Shlemon, 4:27), What Do I Do
If a Loved One "Comes Out"?
(Yuan, 3:13); paper; and pen
• Time required: 25-30 minutes
1. Explain that students will practice correcting misunderstandings of biblical sexuality
with grace and truth. Play the two assigned videos and have students take note of key
ideas on a piece of paper.
2. Divide the class into pairs. Distribute one copy of TR 16.5 Grace and Truth Conversation
Map to each pair. Assign each pair one of the statements below:
• Claim 1: "God makes some people gay, and he doesn't make mistakes, so he clearly
just wants them to be happy and embrace who they are."
• Claim 2: "It's okay for people to have lots of opposite-sex sexual relationships, but
not same-sex ones."
• Claim 3: "Transgender people have a right to be who they really are. They know
they're in the wrong body and need to get healthcare to correct this mistake."
• Claim 4: "As long as same-sex couples follow all the rules (such as "Don't sleep
together until marriage" or "Don't cheat on your spouse"), God is okay with them
getting married."
•Claim 5: "It's cruel for God to make people LGBTQ and then send them to hell
because he doesn't like them."
• Claim 6: "Christianity condemns LGBQ people to a life of loneliness because they
can't get married. They'll never have any kind of family."
• Claim 7: "If someone prays for same-sex attraction or gender dysphoria to go away
but it's still there, that person probably isn't a Christian."
•Claim 8: "If loved ones come out as LGBTQ, Christians should back away from
relationship with them."
3. Direct each pair to read their assigned statement. Explain that statements may come
from the perspective of either a non-Christian or a Christian who is confused about
what the Bible says about sexuality.
4. Have them write their assigned claim in the first speech bubble for Person A in TR
16.5. Direct them to write their response in the first speech bubble in the Christian
Student column. Explain that they will finish the conversation using the remaining
speech bubbles in each column. Christian students will gently correct Person A's
misconceptions. Inform students that many objections can be answered by explaining
the Bible's teachings about creation, the fall, or redemption and restoration through
Jesus. Encourage students to move the conversation toward Jesus when possible.
Explain that conversations need to exhibit both grace and truth.
5. Have pairs share their answers. Use the Answer Key from TR 16.5 to guide the
conversation.
© The Body, Human Sexuality, and the Bible
CHAPTER 16 | 293
APOLOGETICS G


<!-- page-8 (book p.16) -->

CH
Lesson 6:
Videos P
In this lesson, students will
view four interviews of various
Christian educators and authors.
Each expert answers a specific
worldview or apologetics
question. These videos will allow
students to expand their
knowledge and provide biblical
answers to thought-provoking
questions. The following videos
will be used in today's lesson:
1. Is the Bible against Sex?
(Yuan, 3:22)
2. Is Pornography Okay in
Marriage? (Jizmejian, 2:40)
3. The Bible and Sexual Identity
(Yuan, 3:24)
4. The Bible and Sexuality
(Yuan, 6:00)
Play the videos one at a time in
the order listed above. Before
each video, direct students to
read the questions associated
with that video in their student
manual so they know what to
listen for. After the video has been
shown, students should write
their answers to the Discussion
Questions. It may be necessary to
play the video again so students
can answer all the questions.
Go over the questions for the
first video. Play the next video.
Continue in this manner until
the last video has been played and
questions have been discussed.
294 | CHAPTER 16
• Video 1:
Is the Bible Against Sex?
1. Is the Bible against sex? Explain.
No. In fact, the Song of Solomon is a whole book of the Bible that is
about sex.
2. What is the proper context for sex, according to the Bible?
Sex is reserved for marriage between one man and one woman.
3. The ultimate purpose of sex is to give God
glory
• Video 2:
Is Pornography Okay in Marriage?
1. What effect does pornography have on a married couple's
bonding?
Pornography slowly pulls a marriage's bond apart. It increases the
likelihood of affairs and divorce.
2. How is pornography self-centered instead of other-centered?
Pornography places a person's own sexual appetites, wants, and needs
at the center.
3. What is the problem with pornography use within marriage?
Pornography brings us into a sexual relationship without a covenant
or commitment to the people performing the sexual act.
•
Video 3:
The Bible and Sexual Identity
1. What is sexuality, according to many people in culture?
Many people believe sexuality is an identity, that it's central to who
we are.
2. According to the speaker, what is sexuality?
Sexuality is our desires, attractions, and relationships.
3. Is a strong, unchosen desire an identity? Explain.
No, it isn't. No matter how unchosen a desire is, it's not who you
are.
4. What is our identity as human beings?
We are all created in God's image, but we are also all fallen. We are not perfect.
5. For Christians, where do we need to anchor our identity?
Christians need to put our identity in Christ. Our identity needs to be in Jesus
Christ alone.
6. How do we need to understand words such as "gay," "straight,"
"bisexual," "heterosexual," and "homosexual"?
We need to understand them as descriptions of attractions and desires, not
identity.
• Video 4:
The Bible and Sexuality
1. What three types of biblical context are important to consider when
studying what the Bible says about sexuality?
Literary, historical, and canonical context
2. According to the speaker, what is one example of a wrong historical
context?
The claim that homosexuality was common during Jesus' day uses the wrong
historical context. This is misleading because while it was common in Rome, it
wasn't among observant Jews.
3. What is the key to correctly understanding what the Bible says about
sexuality?
The key is reading in light of the whole canon of Scripture.
4. What Bible passages did Jesus quote from when he defined marriage?
Jesus quoted from Genesis 1-2 when explaining the definition of marriage.
5. What does the unified witness of Scripture teach about sex and marriage?
Sex and sexuality are reserved for the beauty of marriage between one man and
one woman.
CHAPTER 16 | 295
APOLOGETICS G


<!-- page-9 (book p.16) -->

CH
Lesson 7:
and
Review P
Have students turn to Activity:
Identify Me in their student
manual. Read the directions.
Display PS 16.7 Chapter 16
Review. to help students review
the concepts in Chapter 16.
Allow students to discuss chapter
concepts, take notes, and use
TR 16.SG Chapter 15 Review
Guide as needed.
CHAPTER 16 REVIEW
Key Terms
transgender
biological sex
marriage
sexual orientation
gender identity
same-sex attraction
gender dysphoria
Key Verses
1 Corinthians 13:6
Ephesians 4:15
Romans 12:1
Romans 8:26
2 Timothy 2:22
1 Corinthians 10:13
The Body and Human
Sexuality in the Bible
296 | CHAPTER 16
IDENTIFY ME
Students will distinguish between the biblical view and
false views of sex and gender.
• Materials needed: student textbook (optional), scissors,
halved blank paper, and pen
• Time required: 20-25 minutes
1. Distribute two halves of blank paper to each student.
Direct students to write biblical on one half and cultural
on the other, in large letters. After you read each of the
statements below, say, "identify me," and have students
raise the appropriate half-sheet to identify whether
the statement comes from a biblical or a false cultural
worldview. Ask one or two students to explain their
answer before moving to the next statement.
2. If students have questions during the activity, review
relevant lesson content in the student textbook.
3. Conclude the activity by having a student volunteer
read Galatians 2:20. Discuss how this verse encourages
us to find our identity in Christ and live for him, body
and soul.
IDENTIFY ME STATEMENTS
• "We know someone's sexual orientation by how they feel inside." Answer: cultural
• "Gender identity can't be separated from sex, even if someone feels at odds with
his or her body." Answer: biblical
• "Gender dysphoria is a form of brokenness, not just sin." Answer: biblical
• "Same-sex attraction means that someone's identity is gay or lesbian. It's who
they are." Answer: cultural
• "Marriage is a relationship for any people who are in love with each other and
want to make it official." Answer: cultural
• "Gender dysphoria is an indication that someone was born in the wrong body and
needs medical treatment to fix it." Answer: cultural
• "Marriage is a covenant between one man and one woman before God."
• "Sexuality needs to be inclusive of all consenting relationships." Answer: cultural
• "The key to sexual morality is the physical design of our bodies." Answer: biblical
• "Marriage is not only a physical union, but an emotional and spiritual one."
• "The key to sexual morality is getting consent from your partner." Answer: cultural
• "Same-sex marriage isn't marriage because it cannot physically be a one-flesh
union." Answer: biblical
• Indulging your sexual desires is critical to resolving sexual brokenness."
Answer: cultural
• "Same-sex attraction and gender dysphoria are two among many temptations
and wrongly oriented desires people may experience in a broken world."
• "If God doesn't take away people's same-sex attraction and gender dysphoria, he
must condone homosexuality and transgenderism." Answer: cultural
• "Embracing your feelings is key to dealing with sexual desires." Answer: cultural
• "Our desires, no matter how strong or deep they are, do not make up our identity."
• "Repentance and reliance on the Holy Spirit are key to dealing with sexual
temptations." Answer: biblical
• "Society accepts a diverse range of sexual relationships, so Christians should too."
Answer: cultural
•Redemption and restoration through Jesus are vital to resolving sexual
brokenness." Answer: biblical
• "Society would flourish best if people lived by God's creational design for sex,
gender, and marriage." Answer: biblical
CHAPTER 16 | 297
g The Body, Human Sexuality, and the Bible


<!-- page-10 (book p.16) -->

CH
16 Test p
Distribute TR 16.8 Chapter 16 Test to each student and allow
time for them to complete the exercises. Students who finish early
may start reading Chapter 17. Assign the homework.
Notes
Being a Faithtul
Witness
298 | CHAPTER 16
