# Chapter 18

<!-- page-1 (book p.17) -->

CH
17 Test P
Distribute TR 17.8 Chapter 17 Test to each student and allow
time for them to complete the exercises. Students who finish early
may start reading Chapter 18. Assign the homework.
Notes
Conclusion
316 | CHAPTER 17
APOLOGETICS -


<!-- page-2 (book p.1) -->

Conclusion
Chapter 18 Syllabus
Lesson
REVIEW
READ
READ
COMPLETE
WATCH
PRESENT
PRESENT
REVIEW FOR
GIVE
Additional/alternate content
STUDY FOR
Assignment
Chapter 17 Test
Questions for Chapter 18.1-18.2
Activity: Mission Revealed
Chapter 18.3-18.4
Questions for Chapter 18.3-18.4
Questions for Chapter 18.3-18.4
Activity: Balancing Grace and Truth
Chapter 18.5
Questions for Chapter 18.5
Questions for Chapter 18.5
Activity: The Final Apologetic-Love
Letter to a Friend Project
Letter to a Friend Outline
Videos
Video Questions
Video Questions
Letter to a Friend
Letter to a Friend
Cumulative Study Guide Questions
Student Textbook (ST) Student Manual (SM)
318 | CHAPTER 18
Page
ST 297-300
SM 336-337
322-323
324-325
ST 300-302
SM 339
328-329
SM 14-15
SM 343-344
330-331
SM 345
TR 18.SG
Chapter 18
OVERVIEW
To understand evangelism and apologetics,
we need to begin with the Bible, the
foundational document for all Christian
life. The Bible is the inspired and
authoritative Word of God, reliable and
true in everything it teaches. The Bible
tells us about God's mission, which is
his plan to bless, redeem, and restore all
of creation. The biblical metanarrative
includes six acts and an interlude: Creation,
the Fall, Redemption Initiated, Interlude,
Redemption Accomplished, Restoration
Initiated, and Restoration Accomplished.
Participating in God's mission includes
being the people of God, doing the will of
God in our communities, and telling the
gospel message with words. Four major areas
of Christian witness include evangelism,
discipleship, missions, and apologetics.
Christians need to be prepared to share the
gospel with truth and grace. Understanding
both the biblical metanarrative and the laws
of logic helps us give reasonable answers
to common questions and challenges to
Christianity, including: Is claiming truth
intolerant? Are all religions the same? Is
belief in the supernatural outdated? Is
Christianity anti-science? Why do evil and
suffering exist? What's the deal with hell?
What does the Bible have to say about
violence, slavery, and racism? What does the
Bible have to say about sex and gender?
Everyone has a worldview, a pattern of
ideas that seeks to answer big questions such
as: "Who am I?" "Why am I here? and
"What is the purpose of life." Worldviews
inform values, which then influence
behaviors. Christians learn how to engage
people on the worldview level because a
person's worldview will often determine
what evidence he or she will accept. This
means gently questioning the worldview
assumptions of others and helping others
examine the evidence for Christianity.
5 Conclusion
PREPARATION P
Lesson 1:
Print a copy of TR 18.1 Mission
Revealed and cut out the cards.
Mix up the cards and clip them
together with a paper clip.
Lesson 3:
Review PS 18.3 The Final
Apologetic-Love to become
familiar with the activity.
Concordances may be used for this
activity.
Lesson 5:
Access and preview the videos
listed on Lesson 5. See the inside
back cover of this manual for
instructions to stream videos.
Print a copy of TR 18.8 Cumulative
Test for each student.
LESSON MATERIALS
Presentation Slides
PS 18.3 The Final Apologetic-Love
PS 18.7 Cumulative Review
Teacher Resources
TR 18.1 Mission Revealed
TR 18.SG Cumulative Study Guide
TR 18.8 Cumulative Test
CHAPTER 18 | 319


<!-- page-3 (book p.18) -->

CH
Lesson 1:
18.1-18.2 p
Review Chapter 17 Test. Have
students turn to page 294 in
their student textbook. Read the
objectives to the class. Go over
the answers to the Discussion
Questions for Chapter 18.1-18.2
on page 334 in the student
manual. Have students turn to
Activity: Mission Revealed.
Have the cards from TR 18.1
Mission Revealed available.
Assign the homework.
OBJECTIVES
© Students will be able
to correlate Scripture's
metanarrative to the mission
of God. [18.1]
describe the ways Christians
participate in God's mission.
[18.2]
320 | CHAPTER 18
1. What is the Bible? Use your own words to describe it. [18.1]
Answers will vary but should include: Scripture is a true story
for the world. It is a metanarrative and a story about God-what
he has done, is doing, and will do. The Bible is the inspired
and authoritative Word of God. It is God's revelation to us,
communicated through human authors with the guidance of the
Holy Spirit. It is true in all that it affirms and is historically reliable.
2. How can we know the Bible is true? [18.1]
Answers will vary but should include: Understanding the Bible's
literary genre shows that it is neither mythical nor scientifically
inaccurate. Historical evidence reveals that the Bible accurately
describes real people and events. The Bible has been carefully copied
and preserved over time, as evidenced by the meticulous copying of
scribes through the years.
3. In your own words, explain the six acts of the biblical story.
18.1]
Answers will vary but should include:
•Act 1: Creation-God's Good World
•Act 2: The Fall-Sin and Its Consequences
• Act 3: Redemption Initiated-Israel
• Interlude: The Second Temple Period
•Act 4: Redemption Accomplished—Jesus
• Act 5: Restoration Initiated-The Church
• Act 6: Restoration Accomplished-New Creation
4. What is the mission of God, and how can Christians
participate in it? [18.2]
Answers will vary but should include: God's mission is his great
plan to bless, redeem, and restore all creation. We participate in
God's mission by being the people of God in our communities,
demonstrating the love of Jesus through our actions, and telling the
gospel message with words. This last aspect includes evangelism,
discipleship, missions, and apologetics.
5. What are some key aspects of doing apologetics well and with
love? [18.2]
Answers will vary but should include: A loving approach requires
humility, willingness to submit our understanding of the truth to
Jesus, genuine interest in other people, good listening and question-
asking, and sensitivity to the unique dynamics of each situation.
Using reason and logic, thinking critically, using sound arguments,
discernment, and using words carefully are also important to doing
apologetics well.
MISSION REVEALED
Students will deduce which act
of the biblical metanarrative best
expresses specific aspects of God's
and humanity's revealed missions.
• Materials needed: TR 18.1,
scissors, and timer
• Time required: 15-20 minutes
1. Distribute one card from TR 18.1 Mission Revealed to each student. Have all
students cover the number on their card with their thumb. Inform students they
may not show their card to others. Students who receive a Metanarrative card will
serve as team leaders. Have team leaders stand at seven separate stations around
the room. Students who receive an Our Mission Revealed card or a God's Mission
Revealed card are mission representatives.
2. Briefly review God's mission as God's plan to bless, redeem, and restore his
creation with the class. Remind students that human beings have always had and
still have a part to play in God's mission, even if individuals' ways of participating
look slightly different.
3. Explain that the object of the game is for team leaders and mission representatives
to match the correct Our Mission Revealed card and God's Mission Revealed card to
the corresponding Metanarrative card, forming a final team of one team leader and
two mission representatives.
4. Lead students to begin by asking the mission representatives to take turns
approaching team leaders and asking either, "When is your metanarrative act in
history?" or "What is your metanarrative act all about?" Direct team leaders to
respond by describing the metanarrative act on their card without using any words
on their card. The mission representative will then determine whether his or her
mission card possibly belongs with that metanarrative act. If not, the mission
representative moves to the next station. If it is possible the mission card belongs
with the Metanarrative card, the mission representative may say to the team leader,
"Ask me a question." The team leader may ask up to three questions and may
not use any words on the Metanarrative card. If the team leader determines the
mission card belongs with the Metanarrative card, he or she will invite the mission
representative to remain at that station to help ask questions to find the third
member of their team. Team members may not reveal their cards to each other.
5. Give teams a maximum of 10 minutes to complete their matches. When all teams
have obtained three members, have each team reveal their cards to each other to
see if all the numbers on the cards match.
6. In conclusion, remind students that as Christians, we are witnesses of Jesus to a
lost world. Our mission is to be representatives of the gospel in how we live our
lives, to do the gospel by serving others in redemptive and restorative ways, and to
tell the gospel through clear communication of the truth about Jesus.
CHAPTER 18 | 321
© Conclusion


<!-- page-4 (book p.18) -->

CH
Lesson 2:
18.3-18.4
Read the objectives to the
class. Go over the Discussion
Questions for Chapter 18.3-18.4.
Balancing Grace and Truth in
their student manual. Read the
directions. Assign the homework.
OBJECTIVES
examine five foundational
questions about truth, religion,
and science. [18.3]
respond to four challenges to
the Christian faith. [18.4]
322 | CHAPTER 18
1. Is claiming truth intolerant? Explain. [18.3]
Claiming truth isn't intolerant; it's just common sense.
Postmodernism claims that truth cannot be known, and relativism
teaches that all truth is relative to the individual or culture. However,
these views are self-defeating since they each claim to know at least
one truth. Claiming religious truth isn't intolerant. Religions have
many contradictory beliefs, so it is not logically possible for all of
them to be true.
2. Is belief in the supernatural outdated or anti-science? Explain.
[18.3]
Many arguments for the existence of the supernatural, especially
the existence of God, are still relevant today, including the
Kalam cosmological argument, the design argument, and the
moral argument. Though some belief systems that recognize the
supernatural might be anti-science, Christianity is not. Christians
have always valued the study of the natural world, and most early
pioneers of modern science identified themselves as Christians.
3. How can a good and all-powerful God allow evil and
suffering? [18.4]
God did not create evil. Instead, evil is the rejection of God's
goodness. Sin came into the world through the fall when Adam
and Eve rebelled against God. The existence of evil does not make
God's existence implausible. God may allow evil to not violate
human free will or may have other reasons we finite beings can't fully
understand.
4. How can a God of love send people to hell or support
violence? [18.4]
In a sense, hell is freely chosen because it is a place where those
who have broken God's moral law and continued rejecting Christ's
offer of redemption are forever excluded from God's presence. God
bringing violent judgment in the Old Testament or final judgment
in hell isn't an arbitrary response to wrath but his just and measured
response to evil. God's love and goodness require that he enact
justice. God must bring judgment against evil.
5. How would you answer someone who claims the Bible supports racism,
sexism, and homophobia? [18.4]
Answers will vary but should include: First, ask questions for clarity. Then, point
back to the whole story of Scripture and Jesus. Finally, explain that Scripture
teaches that all human beings have inherent dignity as God's image-bearers.
The Bible celebrates the goodness of the physical body and God's design for sex
within the covenant of marriage between a man and a woman. Not everything
described in the Bible is commanded by the Bible. In passages where God seems
to command violence, the context often shows these are acts of God's righteous
judgment, not arbitrary evil.
6. What are some questions you could ask for clarification before giving an
answer to someone stating misconceptions or making false claims about
Christianity? [18.3-4]
Answers will vary but may include the following questions:
• What do you mean by
• What leads you to believe that is true?
•How did you come to that conclusion?
• What difference does that make in your life?
• What evidence supports that claim?
•Can you say more about _
•Can you help me understand?
•Have you ever considered _
CHAPTER 18 | 323
© Conclusion


<!-- page-5 (book p.18) -->

CH
18.3-18.4
(continued)
324 | CHAPTER 18
BALANCING GRACE AND TRUTH
Students will brainstorm and demonstrate ways to respond to
challenges to Christianity.
• Materials needed: student textbook, Bible, and pen
• Time required: 20-25 minutes
1. Have students work in pairs. Assign each pair one of the
challenges below. Have pairs write their assigned challenge
in the Balancing Grace and Truth worksheet in their
student manual.
• "Claiming truth is intolerant. Do you think you're the only
one who knows the right answers?"
• "All religions are basically the same. Since you're all
aiming for the same goal, just stop trying to convince other
religious people that you're right."
• "Religion is irrelevant. I don't need a god to be a good
person."
• "You still believe those fairy tales? Belief in the
supernatural is outdated."
• "Christianity has a long history of suppressing science and
silencing scientists."
• "If your God is so good, why do evil and suffering exist?"
• "You must really hate people if you believe in hell. It's such
a cruel belief."
• "The Bible clearly supports slavery and violence. How can
you believe that stuff?"
• "Christianity is so restrictive about sex. Don't you see how
that's harmful to people?"
2. Review the concept of imago Dei and remind students
we need to speak the truth with grace to others, always
remembering their value.
3. Direct pairs to brainstorm positive and negative responses
to their assigned question, then complete the study. Inform
students that they may reference Chapter 18.3-4 for this
part of the activity. Explain that positive responses include
a clear answer and a respectful manner. Negative responses
can include incomplete, inaccurate, confrontational, or
impatient replies. Pairs' final responses need to be specific,
detailing particular actions and word choices. Have them keep
responses brief.
4. Have pairs share their answers by having one partner act out a
positive response and the other act out a negative response.
BALANCING GRACE AND TRUTH ANSWERS
Challenge: Answers will vary but will include the pair's assigned challenge.
Give an example of a positive response to use.
What to say:
Answers will vary but should be approximately one to three complete
sentences. For example, "You're right that a person doesn't have to be
religious to do good deeds. But good deeds are only objectively good if
God exists. If not, anything goes."
Examples of positive body language to include:
Possible answer: consistent eye contact, smile, relaxed posture, and
arms by sides
Give an example of a negative response to avoid. What not to say:
Answers will vary but should be approximately one to three complete
sentences. For example, "Are you kidding me? Everyone needs religion
and God to be good. Do you think you're better than everyone else?"
Examples of negative body language to avoid:
Possible answer: crossed arms, defensive posture, hunched shoulders,
clenched fist or jaw, and lack of engagement.
CHAPTER 18 | 325
→ conclusion


<!-- page-6 (book p.18) -->

CH
Lesson 3:
18.5 p
Read the objective to the
class. Go over the Discussion
Questions for Chapter 18.5.
The Final Apologetic-Love in
their student manual. Be ready
to display PS 18.3 The Final
Apologetic - Love. Read the
directions.
OBJECTIVE
determine ways worldview
affects behavior. [18.5]
ENRICHMENT
* Have students read the article
The Gospel and Apologetics,
by Ben Keiser, in the online
Teacher Resources.
326 | CHAPTER 18
1. How can two people look at the same evidence and come to
opposite conclusions? [18.5]
The answer comes down to worldview. A worldview is a way of
seeing the world. Like a pair of glasses, it determines how things
will look to us. Someone with a secular worldview a worldview that
teaches miracles are impossible) is not likely to call an extraordinary
experience a miracle, even if there is no alternative explanation. A
Christian looking at the same experience would more likely interpret
this as evidence for a miracle.
2. How might one's worldview affect his or her values and
behavior? (Give an example not the mentioned in the textbook.)
[18.5]
Answers will vary but may include the following: Worldviews
strongly influence values, which often determine how individuals
behave. For example, someone holding a Christian worldview ought
to value the goodness of the body and thus strive to honor God
with his or her body and live with sexual integrity. If someone holds
a worldview that denies the existence or knowability of objective
moral truth, this may lead to living however he or she pleases,
regardless of ethical considerations.
3. How might one's behavior or experience affect his or her
worldview? Give an example. [18.5]
If a person's behavior or experience consistently conflicts with
his or her stated worldview, that person may eventually abandon
that worldview and adopt one that justifies his or her behavior.
For example, someone who holds a non-supernatural worldview
but experiences many things that cannot be explained naturally
may adopt a worldview that allows for the supernatural. A
professing Christian who persistently lives in sexual immorality
without repentance might abandon Christianity for a more secular
worldview.
THE FINAL APOLOGETIC-LOVE
Students will analyze key Scripture
• Materials needed: PS 18.3, concordance
passages and create a graphic
(optional), Bible, ruler, blank paper,
organizer illustrating the role of love in
and pen
apologetics.
• Time required: 30-35 minutes
1. Have student volunteers read John 13:34-35 and John 15:9-11 aloud. Have students
answer the following question:
• In these passages, what character quality does Jesus indicate will be evident in his
disciples? (Love)
2. Display PS 18.3 The Final Apologetic-Love and ask a volunteer to read slide 1. Discuss the
diagram. Then, discuss and answer the question on the slide.
3. Display slide 2. Give students five minutes to reflect on the five worldview questions and
take notes in the Worldview Reflection Tool in their student manual. Have students reflect
on each question and write their answers based on an accurate representation of their
current worldview, not what they think their worldview is expected to be. Students may
use the reflection questions at the bottom of the slide to guide their responses.
4. Read the directions on slide 3. Have each student create a unique graphic organizer of
Bible verses on the topic: "What Jesus says about love." Each student's graphic organizer
may include the verses provided on the slide or others he or she wishes to include. This
chart may be designed one of two ways: 1.) It can be designed as a personal summary of
ways this class has shaped the student's worldview on the five big questions and how his
or her role as an apologist will focus on love. 2.) Students may design their charts to serve
as an apologetics tool for sharing with others what Jesus teaches about love and how this
answers the five big worldview questions. Encourage students to be creative with their
graphic organizers and personalize them for how they will use them.
5. In conclusion, have students share their work with a classmate. Inform students that they
may continue to work on their organizers after the class concludes and may wish to update
their charts with new verses as they learn and grow.
WORLDVIEW REFLECTION TOOL
Answers will vary.
Who am I?
Why am I here?
Who is God?
What is the purpose of life?
What is humanity's greatest problem?
CHAPTER 18 | 327


<!-- page-7 (book p.18) -->

CH
Lesson 4:
Letter to a Friend in their
student manual. Read the
directions. (Optional) Assign TR
18.SG Chapter 18 Cumulative
Study Guide to help prepare for
the Cumulative 18 Test.
LETTER TO A FRIEND
Students will write a letter to a friend struggling with
questions about Christianity.
• Materials needed: student textbook, Bible, paper, and pen
• Time required: 45-50 minutes
1. Inform students that they will work individually to
write a letter to a friend answering questions about
Christianity or addressing objections to the Christian
faith and worldview. The letter needs to have 350-400
words. Guide students to select one of the topics below
for their letter:
• How can you trust the Bible? Hasn't it been changed
over time? (student textbook Chapter 2)
• Isn't the Bible just a book of religious rules and fairy
tales? (Chapters 2-3)
• Does doubting my faith mean I'm a bad Christian?
(Chapter 7)
• Isn't claiming to know truth intolerant? (Chapter 8)
• Aren't all religions the same? (Chapter 9)
• Isn't religion irrelevant in our modern era? (Chapter
10)
• Isn't belief in the supernatural outdated and
superstitious? (Chapter 11)
• Isn't Christianity anti-science? (Chapter 12)
• If God is good, why do evil and suffering exist?
(Chapter 13)
• How can a good God allow a place like hell? (Chapter
14)
• Doesn't the Bible support violence, racism, and
slavery? (Chapter 15)
• Isn't the Bible homophobic? (Chapter 16)
2. Have students begin writing the outline for their letter in class. Instruct
students to identify three key points to discuss in their letters and to support
each point with facts or examples. Students may use their student textbook
as a reference to complete their outlines.
3. Inform students that they will write the letter as a homework assignment.
If desired, students may also create visual aids to accompany their letters.
For homework, assign students to use their outlines to write their letters
to a questioning friend. Remind them to stay within the assigned limit of
350-400 words.
4. Assign each student a time slot to present their letter during Lesson 6 or
7. To calculate the amount of time students have for their presentations,
divide the number of students by the total number of minutes you have for
one and a half class periods. Keep in mind that the first half of Lesson 7 may
be used for presentations; the second half of Lesson 7 will be used to review
for the test.
CHAPTER 18 | 329
5 Conclusion
| CHAPTER 18


<!-- page-8 (book p.18) -->

CH
Lesson 5:
Videos P
In this lesson, students will
view three videos of various
Christian educators and authors.
Each expert answers a specific
worldview or apologetics
question. These videos will
allow students to expand their
knowledge and provide biblical
answers to thought-provoking
questions. The following videos
will be used in today's lesson:
1. How Is Christianity Life
Changing? (Wallace, 4:34)
2. What Is Church For?
(Wilson, 3:24)
3. What Is the Great
Commission? (Wilson, 7:16)
Play the videos one at a time in
the order listed above. Before
each video, direct students to
read the questions associated
with that video in their student
manual so they know what to
listen for. During and after the
video has been shown, students
should write their answers to the
Discussion Questions. It may be
necessary to play the video again
so students can answer all the
questions. Go over the questions
for the first video. Play the next
video. Continue in this manner
until the last video has been
played and questions have been
discussed.
330 | CHAPTER 18
• Video 1:
How Is Christianity Life Changing?
1. How does knowing our relationship with God is secure and
that we are loved change how we live?
We behave differently, not because we want to earn something but
because we're responding to something.
2. Why do people with worldviews that require a certain
behavior to earn God's favor sometimes act better than
Christians?
They have to behave in order to be saved.
3. According to the speaker, "When you do something even
though you don't have to, that's a truly transformed
life."
4. According to the speaker, "The least forgiving people are the
people who think they have nothing to be forgiven for."
• Video 2:
What Is Church For?
1. What is the church?
The church is the people who accept Jesus Christ as their Lord
and Savior.
2. What is the purpose of the church?
The church's purpose is to serve in the ministry of reconciliation.
3. What is the ministry of reconciliation?
The ministry of reconciliation is sharing the good news of Jesus
Christ's love, reconciliation, and healing with a lost and dying world.
4. How are we enabled to engage in Jesus' ministry of
reconciliation?
We receive power from the Holy Spirit to be ministers of the gospel
of Jesus Christ.
• video 3:
What Is the Great Commission?
1. What is the Great Commission?
Go into all the world and make disciples of every tribe and nation and tongue.
2. Does this mean we all need to become missionaries?
Not necessarily. We may need simply to go across the street or across the lunch
table at school.
3. What is discipleship?
Discipleship is walking this journey with others and teaching them the way of
the Lord.
4. Who does the Great Commission apply to?
All Christians are part of the Great Commission.
5. What three things does the speaker recommend we do when we don't
want to participate in the Great Commission?
Ask God to give you the gift of faith; ask God to give you his heart for the lost;
and be willing to boldly go.
CHAPTER 18 | 331


<!-- page-9 (book p.18) -->

CH
Lesson 6:
Letter to a Friend Presentations
in their student manual. Read the
directions.
LETTER TO A FRIEND
PRESENTATIONS
Students will present their letters to the class.
• Materials needed: none
• Time required: 45-50 minutes
1. Allow students to take a minute to review their letters to
a questioning friend.
2. Have students take turns giving a presentation of their
letter and any visual aids. Emphasize they need to stay
within a three-minute time limit. Ensure that students
listen respectfully while others present their letters.
Lesson 7:
and
Cumulative
Review P
LETTER TO A FRIEND PRESENTATIONS
AND REVIEW
Have students turn to Activity: Letter to a Friend in their student
manual. Review the directions and continue the activity with any
students who were not able to give their presentations on Lesson
6. Display PS 18.7 Cumulative Review to help students review
the material in the past chapters. Allow students to discuss chapter
concepts, take notes, and use TR 18.SG Cummulative Study
Guide as needed.
CHAPTER KEY POINT
Key Terms
worldview
evangelism
apologetics
inspiration
presupposition
COMICAL
metanarrative
imago Dei
gospel
justification
sanctification
discipleship
missions
law of noncontradiction
critical thinking
cognitive dissonance
practical atheism
objective truth claim
subjective truth claim
relativism
religious nominalism
atheism
deism
scientism
evil
hell
eternal conscious torment
slavery
indentured servitude
biological sex
Key Verses
John 14:6
John 20:21
Acts 4:12
1 Peter 3:15
1 Peter 3:18
CHAPTER 18 | 333
332 | CHAPTER 18


<!-- page-10 (book p.18) -->

CH
Cumulative
Test P
Distribute TR 18.8 Cumulative Test to each student and allow
time for students to complete the exercises.
Index
Notes
Activities
A
A Closer Look
89 / 95*
A Model Mentor 305 / 318
Analyzing Alice
109 / 116
Analyzing Misconception #2
177 / 189-190
Ancient Law Codes
193 / 205
Answering Slogans
143 / 153
Answering the Big Questions 161 / 173
Aspects of Faith
119 / 125
At the Foot of the Cross
83 / 89-90
Authentic Values
287 / 298-299
B
Balancing Grace and Truth
324-325 / 337-338
Beautiful Atonement
50-51 / 53
Becoming Apologists Bible Study 314 / 329
Bible Brainteaser 23 / 27-28
Bible Evidence Paragraphs 37 / 42
Biblical Sexuality Bible Study
289 / 301-303
Building Blocks of Science & Game Board
TR 12.A
C
Challenge of Origins Theories
215 / 227
Character Role Models Bible Study 307 / 320-321
Christ's Ambassadors 5 / 7
Christian View of Truth 151; TR 8A
Commend, Translate, Defend
69 / 73-74
Community Outreach Plan 9/11
Creeds and Prayers
65 / 68-69
Critical Thinkers in Action 103 / 110
D
Denate Practice
183 / 196
Debating Misconceptions
184 / 197
Deductive or Inductive?
101/107-108
Defending God's Good Design
291 / 305
Dialoging and Listening Well
107 / 114
Disciples Make Disciples 67 / 71
Double Guess Game
TR 3.A
Doubt Mapping 125 / 133
*Student Manual (SM)
5 Index
334 | CHAPTER 18
E
Engaging World Religions
163 / 175
Evidence for the Bible
27 / 33
Examining Faith 121 / 127-129
Faith and Obedience Bible Study 71 / 76-78
Faith Carousel
Family of God
TR 16.A
Fantastic Figures
203 / 216-217
Fighting Slavery
279 / 290
Five Components, One Skit
261; TR 14.A
Foreshadowing the Kingdom Bible Study 195 / 207
Forestall Your Fears 81 / 87
Fulfilling the Mission Bible Study 74-75 / 81-82
G
God's Promises Bible Study
Good from Evil
TR 13.A
Grace and Truth
293 / 307
127 / 135-138
Harvest Bible Study
91-92 / 97-99
Has Evil Been Defeated?
233 / 245
How They Got Ready 95 / 102
How Would You Respond?
185 / 198
Identify Me 296-297 / 310
Identity and Mission
TR 4.A
Individualism
175 / 187
Inspiration Bible Sudy 25 / 30-31
Is the Universe Designed for Life? 213 / 225
Justice, Mercy, and Grace 260 / 272
Justified and Sanctified Bible Study 63 / 65
ACTIVITIES | 335
